
NABIH AMIN PARIS 

American University of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebnon. 


• > 


AblcSunnab Library ( nmusba.wordprcss.com ) 


THE BOOK OF 
KNOWLEDGE 


by 

NABIH AMIN FARIS 


Islamic Book Service 
New Delhi 



CONTENTS 


Preface 


vtr 

Introduction 


ix 

BOOK I 

: The Book of Knowledge Comprising 

Seven Sections 

1 

SECTION I 

On the Value of Knowledge, Instruction 
and Learning together with its evidence 
in tradition and from reason. 

3 

SECTION II 

On praiseworthy and objectionable 
branches of knowledge 

23 

SECTION III 

On what is popularly considered to be 
a part of the science of religion 

67 

SECTION IV 

On the reasons which induced men to 
persue the science of polemics 

101 

SECTION V 

On the Proprieties of the Student and the 
Teacher. 

119 

SECTION VI 

On the Evils of Knowledge and on 
Determining the Distinguishing 
Features of the Learned Men 

147 

SECTION VII 

On the Intellect, its Noble Nature, 
its Definition, and its Divisions 

213 


Bibliography 


229 



PREFACE 


This work would not have been possible without the imaginative 
help of three Princeton scholars: the late Edwin E. Conklin, the great 
American biologist, the late Harold H. Bender, the great linguistic 
scholars and philologist, and my own teacher, mentor, colleague and 
friend, the leading Arab historian Philip K. Hitti. When the work was 
first started, in 1936, Professor Conklin was a retired scholar 
actively directing the affairs of the American in Philadelphia. 
Professor Bender was then Chairman of the Department of Oriental 
Languages and Literatures at Princeton University and the chief 
etymologist of Webster’s International Dictionary. Dr. Hitti was 
Professor of Semitic Languages at Princeton University and the 
moving spirit for the development of Arab studies in the United States 
of America. 

The idea of preparing a translation of the Ihya ’ ‘Ulum al-Din 
of al-Ghazzali originated with Professor Hitti. Professor Bender 
enthusiastically supported it; and Professor Conklin, in spite of his 
primary interest in biology, appreciated the importance of the work 
and got the Society to support it, although the Society s exclusive 
domain was hitherto the natural sciences. To all of these gentleman 
and to the Society, I am greatly indebted. Without them I could not 
have had the intimate company of abu-Hamid for four long years: 

In preparing the translation, use was made of four texts; three 
printed and one in manuscript form. The printed ones are: the first is 
the text printed at Kafr al-Zaghari in A H. 1 352 from the older Cairo 
edition of A H. 1289; it is referred to the notes as ‘C’. The second is 


VII 



The Book of Knowledge 


that contained in the text of the Ithaf al-Sadah al-Muttaqin bi-Sharh 
Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din; it is referred to in the notes as SM (text). The 
third is the text which is reproduced in the margin of the same Ithaf 
al-Sadah; it is referred to in the notes as SM (margin). The fourth and 
perhaps the most important is th; text contained in a four-volume 
manuscript at the Princeton University Library (Philip Hitti, Nabih 
Amin Fans, and Butrus Abd-al-Malik, Descriptive Catalog of the 
Garrett Collection of Arabic Manuscript in the Princeton University 
Library, Princeton 1938, No. 1481). It consists of 525 folios; 
34. 1x27.6 cm.; written surface 27.8x2 1 .5 cm.; 3 1 lines at a page; on 
glazed oriental paper, in naskhi; with catchwords; entires in red; with 
illumination. It probably dates from the late fifteenth century. This 
text, called ‘B’ in the notes, corresponds to SM (text), while ‘C’ 
corresponds to SM (margin). In the translation of Qur’anic verses, 
I depended on J.M. Rodwell’s version. 

It is my hope that by making this important work available, in 
English, non- Arabic-speaking scholars will draw a benefit even from 
my mistakes. 

The Second World War forced the work to be placed in an 
“ice-box”. It might have stayed there indefinitely were it not for the 
interest of Sheikh Muhammad Ashraf, sponsor of the Islamic 
Literature and devoted friend of all Islamic studies. To him I am 
indeed grateful. 

The manuscript was greatly improved by the close and 
thorough reading of two of my students: Mr. Robert Hazo and Mr. 
John Dudley Woodberry. To both I extend my thanks. 


Nabih Amin Fans 

American University of Beinit 
January' 11, 1962. 


INTRODUCTION 

What the Apostle gives you, take; and 
What he forbids, from it desist.” 1 

In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. 

First, I praise Allah, continuously, though the praise of the 
fervent does not do justice to His glory. 

Second, I invoke the blessing of Allah upon His Apostle, the 
lord of mankind, as well as upon the other messengers. 

Third, I ask His help having resolved to write a book on the 
revival 2 of the religious sciences. 

Fourth, I proceed to enlighten you, who are the most self- 
righteous of those who reject belief, and you, who are the most 
immoderate of the thoughtless unbelievers. 

1 am no longer obliged to remain silent, because the 
responsibility to speak, as well as warn you, has been imposed upon 
me by your persistent straying from the clear truth, and by your 
insistence upon fostering evil, flattering ignorance, and stirring up 
opposition against him who, in order to conform to the dictates of 
knowledge, deviates from custom and the established practice of 
men. In doing this he fulfils God’s prescriptions for purifying the self 
and reforming the heart, thus somewhat redeeming a life, which has 
already been dissipated in despair of prevention and remedy, and 
avoids by it the company of him whom the Law giver (Muhammad 
7 . Surah LIX: 7 ” "™ 

2. Arabic ihya has been rendered revivification. I prefer revival. 


viii 


»x 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


S A.W.) described when he said, (2) “The most severely punished of 
all men on the day of resurrection will be a learned man whom Allah 
has not blessed with His knowledge.” 1 For, by my hfe, there is no 
reason for your abiding arrogance except the malady which has 
become an epidemic among the multitudes. That malady consists in 
not discerning this matter’s importance, the gravity of the problem, 
and the seriousness of the crisis; in not seeing that life is waning and 
that what is to come is close at hand, that death is imminent but that 
the journey is still long, that the provisions are scanty, the dangers 
great, and the road blocked. The perceptive knowthat only knowledge 
and works devoted to God avail. 

To tread the crowded and dangerous path of the hereafter with 
neither guide nor companion is difficult, tiring, and strenuous. The 
guides for the road are the learned men who are the heirs of the 
Prophet, but the times are void of them now and only the superficial 
are left, most of whom have been lured by iniquity and overcome by 
Satan . Every one of them was so wrapped up in his immediate fortune 
that he came to see good as evil and evil as good, so that the science 
of religion disappeared and the torch of die true faith was extinguished 
all over the world They duped the people into believing that there was 
no knowledge except such ordinances of government as the judges 
use to settle disputes when the mob riots; or the type of argument 
which the vainglorious displays in order to confuse and refute; or the 
elaborate and flowery language with which the preacher seeks to lure 
the common folk. They did this, because apart from these three, they- 
could find no other ways to snare illegal profit and gam the riches of 
the world. On the other hand the science of the path of the hereafter, 
which our forefathers trod and which includes what Allah in His 
Book called law, wisdom, knowledge, enlightenment, light, guidance, 
and righteousness, has vanished from among men and been completely 
forgotten. Since this is a calamity- afflicting religion and a grave crisis 
overshadowing it, I have therefore deemed it important to engage in 

~ C/ al-Tabarani, al-hiu 'jam aLSagitir (Delhi, 1 3 1 1 ), p. 103;Abu-Nu aym 

al-Isfahani, Hikayat al-Awliya' wa-Tabaqat al-Asfiya’ (Cairo, 1351), 
Vol I, p. 223. 


the writing of this book; to revive the science of religion, to bring to 
light the exemplary lives of the departed imams, and to show what 
branches ofknowledge the prophets and the virtuous fathers regarded 
as useful. 

I have divided the work into four parts or quarters. These are: 
the Acts of Worship, the Usages of Lite, the Destructive Matters in 
Life, and the Saving Matters in Life. I have begun the work with the 
book of knowledge because it is of the utmost importance to 
determine first of all the knowledge which Allah has, through His 
Apostle, ordered the elite to seek. This is shown by the words of the 
Apostle of Allah when he said, “Seeking knowledge is an ordinance 
obligatory upon every Muslim.”' Furthermore, I have begun with the 
book on knowledge in order to distinguish between useful and 
harmful knowledge, as the Prophet said, “We seek refuge in Allah 
from useless knowledge;” 2 and also to show the deviation of the 
people of this age from right conduct, their delusion as by a glistening 
mirage, and therr satisfaction with the husks ofknowledge rather than 
the pith. 

The quarter on th^Acts of Worship comprises ten books: 

1 . The Book of Knowledge 

2. The Articles of Faith 

3 . The Mysteries of Purity 

4 . The Mysteries of Prayer 

5 . The Mysteries of Almsgiving 

6. The Mysteries of Fasting 

7. The Mysteries of the Pilgrimage 

8 . The Rules of Reading the Qur’an 

9. On Invocations and Supplications 

10. On the Office of Portions. 

1. Ibn-Majah, Sunan al-, Mustafa, Intro., 17:5, al Baghawi, Masabih al- 

Sunnah, (Cairo, 1318), Vol. I, p. 15. 

2. Ibn-Majah, Intro., 23:1. 


x 


XI 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


The quarter on Usages of Life comprises ten books: 

1. The Ethics of Eating 

2. The Ethics of Marriage 

3. The Ethics of Earning a Livelihood 

4. On the Lawful and the Unlawful 

5. The Ethics of Companionship and Fellowship with the 
Various Types of Men 

6. On Seclusion 

7. The Ethics of Travel 

8. On Audition and Grief 

9. On Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil 

10. The Ethics of Living as Exemplified in the Virtues of 
the Prophet 

The quarter on the Destructive Matters of Life comprises ten 
books: 

1. On the Wonders of the Heart 

2. On the Discipline of die Soul 

3. On the Curse of the Two Appetites — the Appetite of 

the Stomach and the Appetite of Sex 

4. The Curse of the Tongue 

5. The Curse of Anger, Rancour, and Envy 

6. The Evil of the World’ 

7. The Evil of Wealth and Avarice 

8. The Evil of Pomp and Hypocrisy 

9. The Evil of Pride and Conceit 

10. The Evils of Vanity. 

The quarter on the Saving Matters of Life comprises ten 
books: 

1. On Repentance 

Nos. 5 and 6 are in reverse order in B. 


2. On Patience and Gratitude 

3. On Fear and Hope 

4. On Poverty and Asceticism 

5. On Divine Unity and Dependance 

6. On Love, Longing, Intimacy' and Contentment 

7. On Intentions, Truthfulness, and Sincerity 

8. On Self-Examination and Self-Accounting 

9. On Meditation 

10. On Death. 

In the quarter on the Acts of Worship I shall mention some of 
the hidden (elements) of its etiquette, the niceties of its rules, and the 
mysteries of its meanings. (These), the active learned man badly 
needs; without their knowledge no one will be versed in the science 
of the hereafter. Most of this information has been neglected in 
theological studies. 

In the quarter on the Usage of Life I shall deal with the rules 
of practical religion current among men, its deep mysteries, intricate 
ttvhmq 11 *, and the piety concealed in its rules of conduct, which no 
religious man can do without. 

In the quarter on the Destructive Matters of Life I shall 
enumerate every abhorred trait whose exposure the Qur’an has 
ordered, as well as dealing with the purifying of the soul and the 
cleansing of the heart therefrom. Under every one of these traits I 
shall give its definition, the truth about it, its origin, its evil 
consequences, its symptoms, and finally its treatment. To all this will 
be added illustrations from (he Qur’an tradition, and antiquity. 

In the quarter on the Saving Matters of Life, I shall enumerate 
every praiseworthy trait and every one of the desirable qualities of 
Allah’s favourites (al-muqarrabun) and the saints, by means of 
which the slave seeks to draw near to the Lord of the Universe. 
Similarly, under every'. quality I shall give its definition, the truth 


xii 


1. 


I . Only in C. 


! 


The Book of Knowledge 

about it, its origin, its fruit, the sign by which it is known, its 
excellence which renders it desirable, together with examples to 
illustrate it from (the fields of] law and reason. 

it is true that men have written several works on some of these 
aspects, but this one differs from them in five ways. 

First, by clarifying what they have obscured and elucidating 
what they have treated casually. 

Second, by arranging what they have disarranged, and 
organizing what they have scattered. 

Third, by condensing what they have elaborated, and correcting 
what they’ have approved. 

Fourth, by deleting what they have repeated (and verifying 
what they have set 1 down). 

Fifth, by determining ambiguous matters which have hitherto 
been unintelligible and never dealt with in any work. For although all 
have followed one course, there is no reason why one should not 
proceed independently and bring to light something unknown, paying 
special attention to what his colleagues have forgotten. It is possible 
that such obscure things are noticed, but mention of them in writing 
is overlooked. Or again it may not be a case of overlooking them, but 
rather one of being prevented from exposing them. 

These, therefore, are the characteristics of this work which 
comprises the aggregate of the (previously enumerated) sciences. 
Two things have induced me to divide the work into four quarters. 
The first and original motive is that such an arrangement in research 
and exposition is imperative because the science by which we 
approach the hereafter is divided into the science of revelation I mean 
knowledge and only knowledge. By the science of practical religion 
1 mean knowledge as w ell as action in accordance with that knowledge 
This work will deal only with the science of practical religion, and not 
with revelation, which one is not permitted to record in writing. 

Words between brackets only in C. 


The Book of Knowledge 


although it is the ultimate aim of saints and the desire of the eyes of 
the Sincere. The science of practica. religion is merely a path which 
leads to revelation and only through their path did the prophets of 
God communicate with the people and lead them to Him. Concerning 
revelation itself, the prophets spoke only figuratively and briefly 
through signs and symbols, because they realized the inability of 
man’s mind to comprehend. Therefore since the learned men are heirs 
of the prophets, they cannot but follow in their footsteps and emulate 
their way. 

Furthermore, the science of practical religion is divided into 
outward science, by which is meantthat ofthe functions ofthe senses, 
and inward science, by’ which is meant that of the functions of the 
heart The bodily organs perform either acts of worship or usages of 
life, while the heart, because it is removed from the senses and 
belongs to the world of dominion,* is subject to either praiseworthy 
or blameworthy (influences). Inevitably, therefore, this science 
divides itself into two parts — outward and inward. The outward, 
which pertains to the senses, is subdivided into acts of worship and 
usages of life; the inward, which relates to the conditions ofthe heart 
and the qualities of the soul, is subdivided into things which are 
praiseworthy and things which are objectionable. Together these 
constitute the four parts of the science of practical religion, a 
classification objected to by none. 

My second motive for adopting this division is that I have 
noticed that the interests of students in jurisprudence (which has, for 
the sake of boasting and exploiting its influence and prestige in 
arguments, become popular among those who do not fear God) is 
genuine. It also is divided into quarters. 2 And since he who dresses 
as the beloved will also be beloved, I am not far wrong in deeming that 
die modelling of this book after books of jurisprudence will prove to 
be a clever move in creating interest in it. For this (same) reason, one 
of those who (4) wanted to attract the attention of the authorities to 

1 . Ar. ‘alam-al-malakuty it denotes the Attributes as opposed to alar: al- 

jabarut (the world of almightiness), which denotes the Essence. 

2. I.e The Qur’an, the sunnah , catholic consent, and analogy. 


I. 


The Book of Knowledge 


(the science of) medicine, modelled it after astronomical lists, 
arranging it in tables and numbers, and called (his book) Tables of 
Health . 1 * He did this in order that their interest in that (latter) type (of 
study) might help in drawing them to read it Ingenuity in drawing 
hearts to the science which is good for spiritual life is, however, more 
important than that of interesting them in medicine which benefits 
nothing but physical health. The fruit of this science is the treatment 
of the hearts and souls through which is obtained a life that will 
persist for ever and ever. How inferior, then, is the medicine of the 
body, which is of necessity destined to decay before long. Therefore 
we beg Allah for help to (lead us to) the right path and (the way o' 
truth, verily He is the Generous, the all Bounteous. 


1 . This undoubtedly refers to Taqwim al-Abdan of Ibn-Jazlah (AH. 493/ 

AD. 1 100). See ibn-Khallikan Wafayat al-A ' yan wa-Anba ’ Abna ' al- 
Zaman (Cairo, 1299), Vol. ID, pp. 2556; ibn-abi Usaybi’ah, 'Uyun al- 

Anba'fi Tabaqat al-Atibba ’ (Cairo, 1299), Vol. I, p. 255. A similar but 
earlier work is that of bin-Butian (A.H. 455/A.D 1063) entitled Taqwim 
al-Sihhah, see ibn-abi-Usaybi‘ah, Vol. 1, pp. 241-3. It is more likely that 
the author had in mind the former work since ibn-Jazlah was this close 
contempoary. 


XVI 


BOOK I 


THE BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE 
COMPRISING SEVEN SECTIONS 

The Book of Knowledge comprises seven sections: 

1 On the value of knowledge, instruction, and learning. 

2. On the branches of knowledge which art fard’ayn on the 
branches of knowledge which are fard kifayah ; 3 on the 
definition of jurisprudence (fiqh) and theology (kalam) as 
disciplines in the science of religion; and on the science of the 
hereafter and that of this woYld. 

3. On what is popularly considered to be part of the science of 
religion, but is really not, including a discussion on the nature 
of blameworthy knowledge. 

4. On the defects of debate and the reasons why people have 
engaged in dissension and disputation. 

5 On the proprieties of the teacher and the student. 

6. On the deficiency of knowledge, the drawbacks of the learned, 
and the characteristics distinguishing the scholars of the 
science of the hereafter from those of the science of this world. 

7. On reason, its value, categories and what has been said 
concerning it in Traditions. 

1 Divinely ordained, and binding for every individual Muslim. 

2 Divinely ordained and binding for the Muslim community as a whole. 
Therefore this collective obligation can be discharged for the community 
by the action of some, and is not necessarily binding for each individual 
member. 


2 


1 



SECTION 1 


On the Value of Knowledge, Instruction, and Learning 
together with its evidence in tradition and from reason. 

The excellence of knowledge The evidence for the excellence 
of knowledge in the Qur an is manifest in the words of God: “God 
bears witness that there is no god but He, and the angels, and men 
endued with knowledge, established in righteousness. 1 See, then, 
how God has mentioned Himself first, the angels second, and men 
endowed with knowledge third. In this you really have honour, 
excellence, distinction and rank. And again God said: “God will raise 
in rank those of vou who believe as well as those who are given 
knowledge.” 2 According to ibn-‘ Abbas 3 the learned men rank seven 
hundred grades above the believers; between each two of which is a 
distance five hundred years long. Said God, Say, shall those who 
know be deemed equal with those who do not?”’ 4 God also said, 
“None fear God but the wise among His servants; 5 and again, 
“Say, ‘God is witness enough betwixt me and you, and whoever hath 
the knowledge of The Book! ”’ 6 This 1 mention to you in order to show 
that it was possible only through the power of knowledge. God also 
said, “But they to whom knowledge hath been given said, ‘Woe to 
vou! The reward of God is better [for him who believes and does 
right],”” showing thereby that the great importance of the hereafter 
is appreciated through knowledge. And again God said. These 
parables do we set forth for men: and none understands them save 


1. Surah IE 16. 

2. Surah LVH1:12. ^ 

3. ‘Abdullah, cousin of the 

Prophet; d. A.H. 68/A D. 687- ^ 

88 See al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat 


al-HuJfaz (Hyderabad, 1333) 
Vol. I, p. 37, 

Surah XXXIX: 12. 

Surah XXXV:25. 

Surah XID: 43. 

Surah XXVffl: 80. 


3 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


those who know.” 1 God also said, “But if they were to refer it to the 
Apostle and to those in authority amongst them, those of them who 
would elicit the information would know it” 2 He thus made the 
knowledge of His will dependent upon their efforts to find it out, and 
placed them next to the prophets in the ability to make it known, 't 
has been said that in the following words of God, “O Sons of Adam ! 
We have sent down to you raiments wherewith to cover your 
nakedness, and splendid garments; but the raiment of piety — this is 
best,” 2 the raiments represent knowledge, the splendid garments, 
truth, and the raiment of piety, modesty. God also said, “And We 
have brought them a book: with knowledge have We explained it;” 4 
and again, “But it is clear sign in the hearts of those whom the 
knowledge hath reached;” 5 and, ‘With knowledge will We tell 
them;” 6 and again, “[He] hath created man, [and] hath taught him 
articulate speech.” 7 This, however. He said reproachfully. 

As to the evidence of the value of knowledge in tradition (al- 
akhbar) the Apostle of God said, “Whom God doth love. He giveth 
knowledge of religion and guideth him into the straight path;” 8 and 
again, “The learned men are the heirs of the prophets.” 9 It is also 
well-known that there is no rank above that of prophethood, no 
honour higher than its inheritance. The Prophet also said, “What is 
in the heavens and in the earth intercedes for the learned men.” 10 And 
what rank is higher than that of him for whom the angels of the 
heavens and earth labour interceding with God on his behalf, while 
he is preoccupied with himself. Muhammad also said, “Wisdom 
adds honour to the noble and exalts the slave until he attains the level 
of kings.” The Prophet pointed this out relating to the benefits of 
wisdom in this world, since it is well-known that the hereafter is 
superior and more lasting. Muhammad said again, “Two qualities 
the hypocrite lacks — good intentions and religious insight.”" Do 


1 Surah XXIX: 42 

2. Surah IV: 85. 

3. Surah VH: 25, 

4. Surah VU: 50. 

5. Surah XXIX: 48. 

6. Surah VU: 6. 

7 Surah LV 2,3. 


8. Ibn-Majah , Intro., 17: 1; cf 

al-Bukhari , ‘Ilm, 14. 

9. Sec, supra , p.2. 

10. Masabih , Vol. I, p. 14; cf; 

ibrt-Majah , Intro., 17:4,20:1, 

11. Masabih Vol. 1, p. 15; al- 

Tirmidhi, Sahih, ‘Ilm, 19. 


not doubt tradition, then, because of the hypocrisy of some 
contemporary jurisprudents; theirs is not the jurisprudence which the 
Prophet had in mind. (The definition of jurisprudence will come 
later) . For a jurisprudent to know that the hereafter is better than this 
world is, after all, the lowest type of knowledge he can possess. 
Should it prove to be true and prevail, it would clear him of hypocrisy 
and deceit. The Prophet said, “The best of men is the learned believer 
who, if he is needed, he will be useful; and if dispensed with, he will 
be self-sufficient. ” And again he said, “Belief is like unto a nude who 
should be clothed with piety, ornamented with modesty and should 
have knowledge for progeny.” And again, “The nearest people to 
prophethood are the people of knowledge and the warriors of jihad" 
the former have led men to what the prophets have proclaimed, and 
the latter have wielded their swords on its behalf. He also said, “The 
passing away of a whole tribe is more tolerable than the death of one 
learned man.” And again, “Men are like ores of gold and silver, the 
choicest among them during the Jahiliyah days are also the best 
during the days of Islam, provided they see the light.” 1 He also said, 
“On the day of resurrection the ink of the learned men will be likened 
to the blood of the martyrs.” And again, “Whoever preserves of the 
law forty Traditions in order to transmit them unto my people, I shall, 
on the day of resurrection, be an intercessor and a witness on his 
behalf.” Muhammad also said, “Any one of my people who will 
preserve forty hadiths will on the day of resurrection face God as a 
learned jurisprudent.” And again, “Whoever will become versed in 
the religion of God, God will relieve him of his worries and will 
reward him whence he does not reckon” The Prophet also said, “God 
said unto Abraham, ‘0 Abraham! Verily I am knowing and I love 
every knowing person’ .” And again, “The learned man is the trustee 
of God on earth.” The Prophet said, “there are two groups among 
my people who when they become righteous the populace becomes 
righteous, and when they become corrupt the populace becomes 
corrupt: these are the rulers and the jurisprudents.” Again he said, 
“Should the day come wherein I increase not in knowledge wherewith 
to draw nearer to God, let the dawn of that day be accursed.” 

1. Masabih, Vol. I, p 14; Ahmad ibn-Hanbal, Musnad, ‘Ilm, 1:11 M- 
Tayalisi.2476. 


4 


5 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Concerning the superiority of knowledge to worship and 
martyrdom, the Prophet said, “The superior rank the learned man 
holds in relation to the worshipper is like the superior rank I hold in 
relation to the best of men.” 1 See how he placed knowledge on an 
equal footing with prophethood and belittled the value of practice 
vvithout knowledge, despite the fact that the worshipper may not be 
gnorant of the worship which he observes. Moreover, without this 
knowledge there would have been no worship. The Prophet also said, 
“The superior rank the learned man holds over the worshipper is 
similar to the superiority of the moon when it is full over the other 
stars .” 2 And again, “They will, on the day of resurrection, intercede 
[before GodJ: the prophets, then the learned, then the martyrs.” 3 
Great then is the state of knowledge which ranks next to prophthood 
and stands over martyrdom, the merits of the latter notwithstanding. 
The Prophet also said, “God was not worshipped with anyone better 
than the learned in religion. Verily a single jurisprudent is more 
formidable to Satan than a thousand worshippers.” 4 For everything 
has [its] foundation, and the foundations of this religion is 
jurisprudence. And again, “The best part of your faith is [also] the 
easiest, and the best form of worship is jurisprudence.” The Prophet 
also said, “The learned believer holds a rank seventy degrees higher 
than that of the ordinary believer.” And again, “Verily you have 
come upon a time whose jurisprudents are many and Qur'an readers 
as well as preachers are few, whose beggars are rare and givers 
numerous, wherein deeds are better than know ledge But there will 
come a time when jurisprudents are few and preachers many, whose 
givers are few and beggars numerous, wherein knowledge is better 
than works.” 5 The Prophet also said, “Between the learned and the 
worshipper are a hundred degrees, each two of which are separated 
by the extent of a racing horse's run in seventy years.” 6 The Prophet 
was also asked, “O Apostle of God! What works are best 9 ” To 
which he replied. “Your knowledge of God." He was then asked. 
"Which knowledge do you mean 9 ” He answered. "Y our Knowledge 


1. Masabih , Vol. 1, p. 14. 

2. Ibn-Majah, Intro ,17 4 

3. Ibn-Majah, 37 (22: 7). 


4. Cf. ibn-Majah Intro., 17: 3. 

5. Cf ibn-Hanbal, 7/m, 40. 

6. Cf al-Darimi, Sunan, Intro.. 32. 


of God.” Again he was asked, “We enquire about works and you 
reply concerning knowledge.” Muhammad then said, ‘With your 
knowledge of God, a few works will suffice, but without such 
knowledge, no works, however numerous, avail.” The Proph*’* also 
said, “On the day of resurrection God will [first] raise the worshippers 
and then the learned to whom He will say, ‘O ye company of the 
learned, I did not imbue you with My knowledge but for My 
knowledge ofyou. Moreover, I did not imbue you with My Knowledge 
in order to torment you. Go ye, therefore, for verily 1 have forgiven 
you’.” 1 

As to [the evidence of the value of knowledge in] the sayings 
of the Companions ( al-athar ), ‘Ali ibn-abi-Talib 2 said to Kumayl, 3 
“O thou perfect of knowledge ! Knowledge is better than riches; for 
knowledge guardeth thee whereas thou guardest riches. Knowledge 
governs while riches are governed. Riches diminish with spending 
but knowledge increases therewith.” And again, “The learned is 
superior to the fasting, praying and self-mortifying man. Should the 
learned die, a gap would be created in Islam [by his death] and no one 
would fill this gap save one of his successors.” ‘Ali said: 

“Learning is the glory of mankind. 

The wise are beacons on the road to truth; 

Man is worth his knowledge, nothing more — 

The fool will be his inveterate foe. 

Knowledge is man’s hope of life immortal, 

Man may die but wisdom liveth ever.” 

Abu-al-Aswad 4 said, “Nothing is more precious than 

1. Al-Tabarani, a/-5ag/iir, p. 122. 

2. The fourth Rashidite Caliph. 

3 Ibn-Zyad a-Nakha‘i (A.H. 83 A.D. 702) See al-Taban, Tar'ikh al-Rusul 
w-al Muluk,ed. M. J. deGoeje (Leyden, 1879tf).Vol.n,pp. 1097-98; ibn- 
Sa‘d, Kitab al-Tabaqat al-Kubm, ed Eduard Sachuu and others (Leyden, 
1905-21), Vol VI, p. 124. 

4. Zalim ibn-‘AmraI-Du'ali (A.H. 67/A.D. 686-87). See Yaqut, Irshadal- 
Arib ila Ma 'rifal al-Adib, ed. D.S. Margoliouth (London, 1 907-27), Vol. 
IV, pp. 280-82, al-Isbabani, Kitab al-Aghani (Bulaq, 1 285), Vol. XI, pp. 
105,24. 

n 


6 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


knowledge; while kings rule over men, they are ruled by the learned. ” 
Ibn-‘ Abbas said, “Solomon the son of David was asked to choose 
between knowledge, wealth or power, but he chose knowledge and 
was thereby blessed with wealth and power as well .” 1 Ibn al- 
Mubarak 2 was asked, “Who constitute humanity?” To which he 
replied, “The learned”. It was then said, “And who are the kings?” 
He answered, “The ascetics”. And who,” he was asked, “constitute 
the lowest class among men?” “Those,” said he, “who, in the name 
of religion, grow fat in the world. ” Thus only the learned did 4 ibn-al- 
Mubarak regard as belonging to mankind, because it is knowledge 
which distinguishes man from the other animals. Furthermore, man 
is a human being, not because of his physical prowess for physically 
the camel is his superior; not because of his size for the elephant is 
larger; not because of his courage for the lion is more courageous; not 
because of his appetite for the ox has the greater; not because of 
coitus for the least of the birds is more virile than he; but rather by 
virtue of his noble aims and ideals. [As a matter of fact] he was only 
created to know. 

One of the wise men said, ‘"Would that I might know what 
thing was attained by him whom knowledge has escaped, and what 
tiling has escaped him who has attained knowledge,” The Prophet 
said, “Whoever has been given the Qur'an and thinks that anyone has 
been given something better, he has degraded what God has exalted.” 
Path al-Mawsili 3 said inquiring, “Would not the sick die, if he is 
given no food or drink or medicine?” They said, “Yes” To which 
he said, “Similarly the heart will perish if it is cut off from wisdom 
and knowledge for three davs.” He did indeed speak the truth, for the 
nourishment of the heart, on which its life depends, is knowledge and 
wisdom, just as the nourishment of the body is food. Whoever lacks 
knowledge has an ailing heart and his death is certain; yet he is not 

- cf l Kings, 3:5 AS. ~~ 

2. ‘Abdullah (A.H. 1 8 1 /A. D. 797); see Tadhkirat al-Huffaz , Vol. I, pp. 2 SB- 
57. 

3. Either ibn-Muhammad ibn-Washsnah (A.H. 1 65/A.D. 78 1 -82); sec-ibn- 
al-Athir, al-Kam il Tarikh ed. C.J. Temberg (Leyden, 1867-1871), Vol. 
VI, p. 45; or ibn-Said abu-Muhanunad al-Kari (A.H. 220/A.D. 835); see 
ibid., p. 321. 


aware of his doom because the love of this world and his concern 
therewith have dulled his sense, just as a shock from fright may 
momentarily do away with the pain of a wound although the wound 
be real . Thus when death frees him from the burdens of this world he 
will realize his doom and will, though to no avail, greatly regret it. 
This is like the feeling of a person who has attained safety after having 
been through danger, and like that of a man who has just recovered 
from his drunkenness. We seek refuge in God from the day when all 
things will be brought to light. Men are asleep but at death they will 
aw'ake. Al-Hasan 1 said, “The ink of the learned will be likened to the 
blood of the marty rs, and the former will prove superior .” 2 Ibn- 
Mas‘ud 3 said. “Seek ye know ledge while it be found; it will be veiled 
when its narrators pass away. Verily, by Him in whose hand is my 
life, several men who died martyrs in the cause of God would rather 
that, at resurrection, God would raise them up as learned men for 
what they see of the veneration accorded the learned.” No one is bom 
learned, but knowledge is only the result of learning. Ibn - 4 Abbas 
said, “I w ould rather spend a part of the night in learned discussion 
than in continual prayer.” The same was related of abu-Hurayrah 4 
and Ahmad ibn-Hanbal . 5 Al-Hasan said that in the words of God, 
“Give us good in this world and good in the next,’* the good in this 
world meant knowledge and worship while that of the next signified 
paradise. A wise man was once asked, “What things shall we 
possess?” He replied, “Those things which you will not lose in the 
event of shipwreck,” meaning thereby knowledge, while by shipwreck, 
it is said, he meant the decomposition of the body through death. A 
certain wise man said, “Whoever takes wisdom for his bridle will be 
acclaimed by men as their leader, and whoever is known for his 

1 . Al-Basri; the famous early Muslim ascetic (A.H 1 10/A.D. 728); see ibn- 
Sa‘d. Vol, VD Pt. I. pp. 114-29; ibn-Khallikan, Vol I pp. 227.29. 

2. Cf Supra , p. 12, where the saying is ascribed to Muhammad. 

3. ‘Abdullah (A.H. 32/A.D. 652-3). See Tadhkirat al-Huffaz , Vol. I, pp. 1 3- 
16. 

4. ‘Abd-al-Rahman ibn-Sakhr (A.H. 58/A.D. 678). See Tadhkirat al-Huffaz 
I, pp. 31-35. 

5. A.H. 241/A.D. 855. See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. 1. pp. 28-29. 

6. Surah II* 1 97 


8 


9 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


wisdom will be looked upon with respect.” Al-ShatTi 1 Said “One of 
the noble things about knowledge is that he who is given a portion of 
it, no matter how small, rejoices while he who is deprived of it 
grieves.” 'Umar 2 said, “O men! Seek ye knowledge. For verily God 
has a mantle of love which He casts upon him who seeks knowledge 
even of a single section. Should he then commit an offence, God will 
remonstrate with him thrice in order not to rob him of his mantle, even 
though that offence may persist with him until he dies.” Al-Ahnaf 3 
said, “The learned men came very near being gods; and all power 
which is not supported by knowledge is doomed. Salim ibn-abi-al- 
Ja‘d 4 said, “My master bought me for three hundred dirhams and 
later set me free. Thereupon I said, ‘What shall I take up for 
livelihood? Finally I took up learning and no sooner had a year passed 
than the prince of Makkah called upon me but I would not receive 
him.” al-Zubavr ibn-abi-Bakr 5 said, “My father had written me 
while in al-Hraq saying, ‘Go after knowledge; should you become 
poor it will be your wealth, and should you become rich it will be your 
embellishment .” (This has been related among the exhortations of 
Luqman 6 to his son). He also said, “Sit in the company of the learned 
and keep close to them; for verily God quickens the hearts with the 
light of wisdom as he refreshes die earth with the rain of heaven .” 7 
A cer* ;in wise man said, “When the learned dies the fish of the sea 
as w i as the fow l of the air will mourn him; while his face shall 
disappear his memory will not be forgotten.” Al-Zuhri 8 said, 
“Knowledge is glorious and is not treasured except by the glorious. ’ 

1 Muhammad ibn-Idris, (A.H. 204/A. D. 820) See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. II, p. 

214. 

2. The second Rashidite Caliph. 

3. Sakhr ibn-Qays d. between A.H. 67 and 77/A.D. 686 and 699 Cf ibn- 
Qutavbah, Kitab al-\la‘brif ed. F. Wustenfeld (Gottingen, 1850), pp. 
2 16-i 7. 

4 A.H. 100/A.D. 719 See al-Ma'arif p. 230. 

5. A.H. 256/A.D. 870. See al Nadim, al-Fihrist y ed. Fiugel (Leipzig, 1 872), 
pp. 1 10-1 1; ibn-Khalikan, Vol. I, pp. 336-7 

6. Legendary figure to whom the Arabs ascribe much wisdom. 

7. Malik, al-\fuwatta\ Talab al-Ilm. 1. 

8. Probably abu-Saiamah ibn-‘Abd-al-Rahman (A.H. 94/A.D 713), See 
Tadhkirat al-Huffaz r Vol. I. p 59. 


On The Excellence of Learning 

The excellence of learning is attested in the Qur’an by the 
following words of God: ‘‘And if a party of every band of them march 
not out. it is that they may instruct themselves in their religion;” 1 and 
again. "Ask of those who have Books of Monition if ye know it not.” 2 

[As to the evidence of the excellence of learning] in tradition, 
the Prophet of God said. "Whoever follow s a path in search of 
know ledge. God w ill guide him into a path leading into Paradise.” 3 
And again. "Verily the angels will bow low to the seeker after 
knowledge in approval of what he does. ’ 4 He also said, “To rise up 
before day break and leam but a section of know ledge is better than 
prostrating y ourself in pray er a hundred times .” 5 The Apostle again 
said, "One section of know ledge which a man leams is better for him 
thanall the riches of the world.” And again. "Seeking after knowledge 
is an ordinance obligatory upon every Muslim.” 6 [8] He also said, 
"Seek ye knowledge even [as far as] China.” The Prophet further 
said. " Know ledge is like sealed treasure houses, the keys of which 
arc inquiry. Inquire, therefore, for therein lies reward for four: the 
inquirer, the learned, the auditor, and their admirer.” He also said, 
"The ignorant one should not hide his ignorance nor the learned his 
know ledge.” And in a tradition on the authority of abu Dharr, ‘‘To 
be present in the circle of a learned man is better than prostrating 
oneself in prayer a thousand times, or visiting a thousand sick men. 
or joining a thousand funerals.” It was then said, “O Apostle ofGod. 
is it also better than the reading of the Qur'an?" To which he replied, 
"What good, though, is the Qur'an except through knowledge? The 
Prophet also said. "Whoever is overtaken by death while seeking 
knowledge wherewith to strengthen Islam, between him and the 
prophets in Paradise is but one grade.' 

I. Surah IX: 123. 2 Surali XVI: 45 

3. Muslim. al-Dhikr-w-al-Du'a'. Ik Ibu-Majah, Intro , 17: 4. 

4. Ibn-Majah, Intro . 17,4 5 Cf Ibu-Majah, Intro., 16, 9. 

6. Sec supra, p. 3. 

7. Al-Ghiftri. Jundub ibn-Junadah. d A.H 32/A.D 652-3 See al-Nawawi. 
Talullnb ci-Asma. ed F Wustenleld (Gottingen. 1842-7). pp. 714-15 


10 


1 1 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


[As to the evidence of the excellence of learning] in the sayings 
of the Companions, ibn-Abbas said, “While I sought knowledge, I 
was abased, but when I was sought for it, I was exalted.” Similarly, 
ibn-abi-Mulaykah 1 said, “Never have I seen the like of ibn- 6 ‘ Abbas: 
to behold him is to behold the most handsome man; when he speaks, 
he is the most eloquent, and when he hands down a judicial opinion, 
he [reveals himself] as the most learned.” Ibn-al-Mubarak said, “I 
wonder how one who sought no knowledge could be moved to any 
noble deed;” while one of the wise men said, “Verily I pity no one as 
I pity the man who seeks knowledge but understands not, and him 
who understands and seek it not.” Abu-al-Darda’ 2 said, “I would 
rather learn one point than spend my night in continual prayer; ’ and 
again, “The learned and the learner are partners in righteousness 
while the rest of men are barbarians in whom there is no good.” He 
also said, “Be learned, or a learner, or an auditor but never anything 
else lest thou perish.” ‘Ata’ said “[Attendance at] an assembly of 
learning 4 atones [the evil of attending] seventy places of 
entertainment.” “Umar 5 said, “The death of a thousand worshippers 
who spend their days in fasting and their nights in continual prayer 
is a lesser calamity than the passing away of one learned man who is 
aware of what is lawful before God and what is unlawful.” Al-Shafi 4 
said, “Seeking knowledge is better than supererogatory works.” 
Ibn-‘Abd-al-Hakam 6 said, “1 was [once] at Malik’s 7 place studying 
at his feet when the hour of noon arrived. Thereupon I closed my 
books and put them away in order to pray; but he said, ‘What you 
have risen to perform is not better than what you were doing provided 
your intentions are good.” Abu-al-Darda’ also said, “Whoever 
should regard that rising early for study is not jihad [reveals himself] 
deficient in reasoning an d intellect.” 

7 A H. 117/A.D. 735; Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, Vol I~pp. 95-6. 

2. ‘Uwaymir ibn-Zayd (A.H. 32/A.D. 652-3) See ibn-Sa‘d, Vol. VO, Pt. 2, 
pp. 117-18. 

3. Ibn-abi-Rabah (A.H. U5/A.D. 733). See ibn-Qutaybah, p. 227; ibn- 
Khalliksn, I, Vol. pp. 571-3. 

4. " Dhkir " in B. 5. The second Rashidite Caliph. 

6. Abu Muhammad ‘Abdullah (A.H. 314/A.D. 829), father of the famous 
historian of Egypt; see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, pp. 444-5. 

7. Ibn-Anas (A.H. 1 79/A.D. 795). See al-Fihrist , pp. 198-9; ibn-Khallikan, 
Vol. D, p. 200. 

12 


On the excellence of teaching 

The excellence of teaching is supported in the Qur’an by the 
following words of God: “. . . . And may warn their people when they 
come back to them, haply they may take heed to themselves”, 1 bv 
which is meant teaching and guidance. God also said, “Moreover, 
when God entered into a covenant with those to whom the scriptures 
had been given, and said, 'Ye shall surely make it known to mankind 
and not hide it’...” 2 , meaning thereby that teaching was incumbent 
upon them. And again He said, “But truly some of them do conceal 
the truth, though acquainted with it.” 3 Here God has ruled against 
concealing the truth as he has with regard to concealing evidence 
when He said, “He who refuseth [to give evidence] is surely wicked 
at heart.” 4 The Prophet said, “God does not give the learned any 
knowledge unless He enters with them into the same covenant He has 
entered into with the prophets — namely, to make it known and not 
conceal it.” God also said, “And who speaketh fairer than he who 
biddeth to God and doeth the thing that is right?” 5 and again, 
“Summon thou to the way of thy Lord with wisdom and kindly 
warning;” 6 and also" Andteachthem 'The Book’ and Wisdom.” 7 

[As to the evidence of the excellence of teaching] in tradition, 
the Apostle of God, on sending Mu'adh® to al-Yaman, said to him, 
“That, through you, God may lead one man [unto Himself] is better 
for you than the world and all that is in it.”* He also said, “Whoever 
acquires but one section of knowledge in order to teach men, will be 
given the reward of seventy of the righteous.” Jesus said, “He who 
has knowledge and shall do and teach, the same shall be called great 
[9] in the Kingdom of Heaven . ’ 1 0 The Prophet said, “When on the day 

I. Surah IX: 123. 2. Simi/i ffl: 184. 

3. Surah ID: 141. 4. Surah II: 283 

5. Surah XL1: 33. 6. Surah XVI: 126. 

7. Surah HI: 123. 

8. Ibn-Jabal (A.H. 18/A.D. 630). See ibn-Hisham, Sirat Rasul Allah, ed. F. 

Wustented (Gottingen 1 858-60). p. 957: ibn-Sa ‘d. Vol. ID. Pt. 2. pp 1 20- 

26. Vol. VD Pt. 2. pp. 1 14-15; Tahdhib al-Asma'. pp. 559-61. 

9 Cf. Matt. 18: 10-14; Luke 15: 3-10. 

10. Cf Matt. 5, )9,al-Tirmidhi, ilm, 19. 


13 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


of resurrection God says unto the worshippers and the warriors, 
‘Enter ye into Paradise’, the learned would say, ‘By virtue of our 
learning have they attained their piety and fought for Thee’. Then 
God would say unto them, ‘I regard you alike with im angels, 
intercede and you will have your intercessions accepted.’ They then 
would present their intercessions and enter into Paradise This 
cannot result except from knowledge which is made active through 
teaching not from passive knowledge which is inert. The Prophet 
said, “God does not take away knowledge from men after He has 
given it to them, rather it vanishes with the passing away of the 
learned. Thus whenever a learned man passes away, whatever 
[knowledge] he had perishes with him. When finally there are none 
left but ignorant leaders they will give uninformed opinions whenever 
consulted, leading men astray and confusing themselves. The 
Prophet also said, “Whoever has any know ledge but conceals it. will, 
on the dav of resurrection, be bridled with a bit of fire.' He also said. 
“How excellent a gift and how admirable a present is a word of 
wisdom which you hear and imvardly digest and then carrv it and 
teach it to a brother Muslim: verily it is equivalent to a year of 
worship.” 2 And again, “Accursed is the world and all that is in it 
except the name of the exalted God and him who shall follow in His 
way, be it a teacher or one taught.” 3 The Prophet also said. In truth 
God and His angels as well as the heavens and the earth, even the ant 
in its hill and the whale in the sea, will bless the man who teaches his 
fellowmen.” 4 He also said, “A Muslim gives his brother Muslim no 
better benefit than a ‘fair’ tradition which had reached him and which 
he consequently imparts. He also said, *‘A good word which the 
believer hears and follows and also teaches is better for him than a 
year’s worship.” 

One day the Apostle of God passed by two assembled groups: 
the members of the first were calling upon God and offering theii 
supplications, while the others were instructing men. Whereupon he 

1 Cf. Muslim, ‘Ilm, 22; al-Bukhari, ‘Ilm, 35. 

2. Cf. Ibn-Majah, Intro., 24: 1 . 3. Ibn-Majah, Zuhd, 3. 

4. Al-Tirmidhi, ‘Ilm, 19. 


said, “These beseech God; if He wills He will grant them their request 
and if He wills He will withhold it; whereas those teach men and 
verily I was not sent but as a teacher.” 1 Then he turned and sat among 
them. He also said, “The knowledge and guidance which God has 
sent me to declare are like unto heavy rains which fell over a certain 
locality. One spot absorbed the rain and put forth herbs and much 
grass; another spot held the waters with which God benefited men 
who drank therefrom, watered the earth therewith, and then planted 
it; and a third spot was flat, it held no water and put forth no herb.” : 
The first part of the parable signifies the one w ho reaps the benefits 
of his own knowledge, the second signifies the one whose knowledge 
is of benefit to others, while the third stands for him who enjoys 
neither. 

Muhammad also said, “When a man dies all except three of 
his w orks perish, namely, a permanent endowment for charin', useful 
knowledge, and righteous progeny that bring honour upon his 
memory.” 3 And again, “He who leads to something good is like him 
who does it.” 4 He further said, “Envy is unlawful except regarding 
two categories of persons: those [ 10] to whom God has given wealth 
and power to spend that wealth rightly, and those to whom God has 
given wisdom with which they regulate [their lives] and which they 
teach.” 5 The Prophet also said, “God’s mercy is upon my successors.” 
On being asked, “But who are your successors?” he replied, “My 
successors are those who keep my laws and teach them to God’s 
people.” 6 

[As to the evidence of the excellence of teaching] in the sayings 
of the Companions, ‘Umar said, “Whoever shall relate a tradition 
and thus induce someone to do according to its precepts, will, with 
the [actual] doer be equally rewarded.” Ibn-‘ Abbas said, “All things 
even the whale in the sea will intercede for him who teaches men 

1 . Cf Ibn-Majah , Intro. , 17, 10. 

2. Al-Bukhari , ‘Ilm, 2 1 . 

3. Cf. Muslim, Wasiyah, 14; Masabih, Vol. I. p. 14. 

4. Al-Tirmidhi, ‘Ilm, 14. 

5. Cf Al-Bakhari ‘Ilm, 16, Zakah, 5. 

6. Cf Matt. 12: 479, Mark 3, 32-5; Luke 8, 19-21. 


14 


15 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


good. ” One of the learned men said, “The learned man occupies the 
position of an intermediary between God and His creatures; let the 
learned, therefore, be mindful how he occupies this position.’ 

It has been related that Sufyan al-Thawri 1 arrived in 4 Asqalan 
where he tarried but no man questioned him [or sought his 
knowledge]. Whereupon he said, “Hire for me a beast of burden in 
order to depart from this city, for it is a place where knowledge does 
not prosper.” He had not said this except in solicitude over the 
excellence of teaching in which lies the preservation of knowledge. 

4 Ata’ also said, “I came upon Sa‘id ibn-al Musayyab 2 while he was 
weeping, at which 1 said, "What causes you to weep? He answered, 
‘No one seeks from my any information.’ It has also been said that 
the learned men are the lights of the ages; each is the torch of his own 
age and through him his contemporaries obtain light.” Al-Hasan 
said, “Had it not been for the learned, men would have become like 
animals.” For it is through teaching and instruction that men are 
brought out of the category of beasts to that of human beings. 
‘Ikrimah said, “Verily a price is set upon this knowledge ” When 
asked that it was, he replied, “It is to be given to him who can keep 
it well and not lose it.” Yahva ibn-Mu‘adh said, “The learned have 
more compassion for the followers of Muhammad than either their 
fathers or mothers.” “How is that?” he was asked; to which he 
replied, “Their fathers and mothers shield them from the fires of this 
world while the learned protect them against the fires of the next.” 
It has been said that in the process ofleaming the first [step] is silence, 
followed by listening, then retention, then doing, and finally imparting. 
It has also been said, “Teach what you knows to him who does not 
know and learn from him who knows what you do not know. If you 
would do this you would learn what you have not known and would 
retain what vou have already known.” Mu ‘adh ibn-Jabal said, (I 

Z A H. 161/A.D. 778; see Tahdhib al-Asma pp. 286-8. 

2. A H. 95/A.D. 713; see ibn-Qutaybah, pp. 123-4. 

3. ca. A H. 105 A.D. 723, See ibn-Qutaybah, pp. 231-2; Tahdhib al-Asma' 7 
pp. 431-2. 

4. A H. 258/A.D. 872; see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. ID, p. 187-8. 


have also come across the same saying described as a marfu 41 
tradition), “Acquire knowledge, for its acquisition is [equisition to] 
the fear of God, its pursuit is [equivalent to] worship, its study is 
[equivalent to] praise, searching for it is [equivalent to] jihad, 
teaching it to him who does not know is [equivalent to] almsgiving, 
and imparting it to those who are worthy is meritorious . Furthermore, 
it is the bosom friend of the lonesome, the companion in solitude, the 
guide [to religion, the comforter in both] 2 happiness and misfortune, 
the aid to the lonely, the relative among strangers, and the beacon on 
the road to Paradise. Through it God exalts a few and makes them 
leaders in virtues, chiefs 3 and counsellors worthy of emulation, 
pioneers in righteousness whose footsteps should be followed and 
whose deeds should be observed. The angels seek their friendship and 
with their wings they touch them to gain thereby their favour. The 
living and the dead, yea even the w hales and the fish of the sea, the 
lions and beasts of the field, as well as the heaven and its stars 
intercede for them, because know ledge is the protection of hearts 
against blindness, the light of the eyes in darkness, and the fortification 
of the body against decay. Through it man attains the dignity of 
sainthood and the loftiest ranks To reflect upon it is [as meritorious] 
as fasting and its study, as continual prayer. Through it God is 
obeyed, worshipped and glorified: through it he admonishes and 
forewarns; 4 through it His unity* is declared, and through it also 
[man] 5 abstains from sin. Through knowledge the ties of relationship 
are made close by kindly deeds, and the lawful and the unlawful are 
made known. Knowledge is like an imam whereas works are his 
followers. Knowledge is bestowed upon the fortunate and from the 
unfortunate withheld”. 


1 . Marfu' signifies the record of a word or deed of the Prophet reported by 

the Companion who heard or saw it. 

2 Words between brackets only in C. 

3. Only in C 

4 Only in C. 

5 Only in C 


16 


3 


17 


A 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Evidence [for the excellence of knowledge] 

FROM REASON 

The purpose of this section is to comprehend the excellence 
and value of knowledge. Nevertheless, unless excellence is in itself 
understood and its meaning determined it will not be possible to 
acknowledge it as an attribute to knowledge, or to any other trait 
besides. Similarly, whoever expects to determine whether or not 
Zayd is wise without having understood the meaning and essence of 
wisdom, is sure to go astray. 

Excellence is derived from the infinitive to excel, which is 
excrescence. When, therefore, of two objects which are similar, one 
has an extra characteristic, that object is described as excelling the 
other, no matter what its excellence may be. Thus saying that the 
horse is more excellent than the donkey means that the horse shares 
with the donkey' the capacity' for carrying burdens, but excels it in 
charging, wheeling, swiftness, and beauty. However, should a 
donkey possess a ganglionary' growth it would not be described as 
more excellent, because the ganglion, though an excrescence on the 
body, is in reality a defect, an imperfection. In addition the animal is 
sought for its useful qualities, not for its physical features. If you then 
understand this, it will be clear to you that knowledge excels when 
compared with the other attributes, just as the horse is distinguished 
when compared with the other animals. Furthermore, while swiftness 
is an excellent [feature] in the horse, in itself it has no excellence. 
Knowledge, however, is in itself an absolute excellence, apart from 
any attribution. It is the description of God’s perfection, and through 
it die angels and prophets were imbued with honour. The fleet horse 
is better than the slow. Knowledge is, therefore, an excellence in the 
absolute and apart from any attribution. 

A precious and a desired object may be of any of three 
categories: what is sought as a means to an end, what is sought for 
its own [intrinsic value], and what is sought for both. What is sought 
for its own [intrinsic value] is nobler and more excellent than that 
which is sought as a means to an end. The dirham and the dinar are 


objects sought as means to an end to secure other objects. In 
themselves they are only two useless metals; and had not God made 
it possible to transact business through them, they would have been 
the same as pebbles. Happiness in the hereafter and the ecstasy of 
viewing the face of God are sought for their own [intrinsic value], 
whil r physical health is sought both for its own [intrinsic value] and 
as a means to an end. Man’s health, for example, is sought because 
it is a guarantee against bodily pain, and also because it helps [man] 
to reach his ends and [secure his] needs. Similarly, if you would 
consider [the case of] knowledge, you would discover that it is in 
itself delightful and therefore sought for its own [intrinsic value], and 
you would also find it a way which leads to the hereafter and its 
happiness, and the only means whereby we come close to God. 

The greatest achievement in the opinion of man is eternal 
happiness and the most excellent thing is the way which leads to it. 
This happiness will never be attained except through knowledge and 
works, and works are impossible without the knowledge of how they 
are done. The basis for happiness in this world and the next is 
knowledge. Of all works it is, therefore, the most excellent. And why 
not, since the excellence of anything is revealed by the quality of its 
fruit? You have already learnt that the fruit of knowledge in die 
hereafter is drawing near to the Lord of the Universe, attaining the 
rank of the angels, and joining the company of the heavenly hosts. Its 
fruits in this world, however, are power, dignity, influence over 
kings, and reverence from all to an extent that even the ignorant Turks 
and the rude Arabs are found naturally disposed to honour their 
teachers because the latter are distinguished by a great deal of 
knowledge derived from experience. Even the animal does by nature 
honour man because it senses that he is distinguished by a degree of 
perfection exceeding its own. These are, then, the excellence of 
knowledge in the absolute. As shall be seen later, the different 
branches ofknowledge vary, and with their variation their excellences 
vary. 

The excellences of teaching and learning, in view of what we 
have already said, are therefore manifest. For if knowledge is the 


18 


19 




The Book of Knowledge 


most excellent of things, the process of acquiring it would then be a 
search for the most excellent, and imparting it would be promoting 
the most excellent. For human interests extend to both the material 
and the spiritual worlds, and no order exists in the latter without 
existing in the former because this world is a preparation for the next, 
and is the instrument which leads to God anyone who uses it as such, 
a home for him who takes it as a dwelling place. The affairs of this 
world, however, do not become orderly except through human 
activities. These activities, crafts, and industries are divided into 
three categories: 

The first involves four fundamental (activities) without which 
chaos would rule the world: agriculture for raising food-stuffs, 
weaving for manufacturing clothes, architecture for erecting houses, 
and politics for establishing human relationship and society and for 
promoting co-operation in the control of the means of living. 

The second involves such activities as are auxiliary to any of 
the above-mentioned fundamental activities. Thus iron craft is 
auxiliary to agriculture as well as to several other industries, and 
supplies them with their respective tools and instruments such as the 
implements for carding and spinning cotton preparatory to its 
weaving. 

The third involves such activities as are supplementary to the 
previously mentioned principal industries, e.g., the process of milling 
and bread-making in relation to agriculture and the process of 
laundering and tailoring to weaving. 

The relation of these principal activities to the order of things 
in this world is as the relation of the members of the body to the whole, 
because the members of the body are also divided into three categories . 
These are fundamental like the heart, the liver, and the brain; 
auxiliary like the stomach, veins, arteries, and sinews; or 
supplementary and ornamental like nails, fingers and eyebrows. 

The highest of these activities are the fundamental, and of 
these the highest is politics (as employed] in unifying [people] and in 


The Book of Knowledge 


reform. For that reason this discipline demands of those who pursue 
it a degree of perfection greater than that required by any of the other 
disciplines; and in consequence it is inevitable that the politician 
should subordinate to himself, and make use of, the other profession. 

Politics, bent on reform and on guiding people to the straight 
path which [insures] salvation in this world and the next, is [in turn] 
divided into four classes: the first, which is also the highest, is the 
[religious] polity of the prophets which involves their jurisdiction 
over the thoughts and actions of the privileged few and the common 
folk alike. The second is the [civil] polity ofthe caliphs, the kings, and 
the sultans, which involves their jurisdiction over the actions, but not 
the thoughts, of the privileged few and the common folk. The third Is 
the intellectual polity ofthe learned man, who know God and His will 
and who are the heirs ofthe prophets, which involves jurisdiction 
only over the thoughts of the privileged few since the understanding 
of the common folk is too low for them to benefit, and their power of 
discrimination is too weak to observe and emulate their actions, and 
are, therefore, subject to no compulsion or restraint. The fourth is the 
[“ecclesiastical”] polity of the preachers which involves jurisdiction 
only over the thoughts of the common folk. 

Next to the [religious] polity of the prophets, the highest is, 
therefore, the intellectual because of its service in disseminating 
knowledge, in diverting the souls of men from the destructive and 
undesirable traits, and in guiding them to those which lead to 
happiness and are praiseworthy, all of which, in the final analysis, 
fall within the purpose of teaching. We have only said that the 
intellectual activities are more excellent than the other professions 
and activities because the superiority of an activity is known by three 
things: 

1 . By examining the native endowments of man through which 
the activity' is realized, as in the case of the superiority of the 
theoretical sciences over the linguistic. Wisdom is attained 
through the intellect while language, through the sense of 
hearing (and intellect is superior to the [mere] sense of 
hearing). 

21 


20 


The Book of Knowledge 


2. By examining the extent of its usefulness, a$ in the case of the 
superiority of agriculture over the goldsmith’s craft. 

3. By observing die object of its operations, as in the case of the 
superiority of the goldsmith’s craft over tanning; the object of 
the one is gold while that of the other is the hide of a corpse. 

It is further apparent that the religious sciences, which are the 
knowledge of the path to the hereafter, are comprehended through the 
maturin' of the intellect: and as we shall see later, clear understanding 
and clear intellect are the highest attributes of man, because through 
the intellect the responsibility of God’s trust is accepted, and through 
it man can enjoy the closeness to God. 

Concerning the extent of its usefulness there is not the slightest 
doubt since it contributes to happiness in the hereafter. And finally, 
how could the merit of an object of an activity be denied when the 
objects with which the teacher deals are the hearts and souls of men. 
The noblest being on earth is the home sapiens and the noblest in his 
essence is his heart with whose perfecting, cleansing, purifying, and 
leading to God the teacher is occupied Thus on the one hand the work 
of the teacher is a | form of] praise to God and on the other hand a 
[form of] stewardship. It is in fact the highest form of stewardship 
because God has bestowed upon the heart of the learned man 
knowledge, which is His most intimate attribute. Hence the learned 
man is like the keeper of God’s most valuable treasures and has 
permission to give from them to all who need. What rank is, therefore, 
higher than that in which the servant is an intermediary between his 
Lord and his fellowmen, to draw' them closer unto God and to lead 
them to Paradise to which the pious repair. May we, through the 
Grace of God, become one of them, and may He bless even.' chosen 
servant. 


SECTION II 

On praiseworthy and objectionable branches of knowledge, 
their classifications, and the ndes which govern them, including 
those branches of knowledge whose acquisition is deemed fard ayn 
as well as those whose acquisition is deemed fard kifayah : on 
determining the position of theology and jurisprudence in relation 
to the science of religion ; and finally, on showing the superiority of 
the science of the hereafter. 

ON KNOWLEDGE WHOSE ACQUISITION IS 
DEEMED FARD 4 AYN 

The Apostle of God said, “Seeking knowledge is an ordinance 
obligatory on even Muslim,” and again, “Seek ye knowledge even 
[as far as] China.” People, however, disagreed as to what branch of 
knowledge man is obliged to acquire, and aS a result split up into 
about twenty groups. We shall not go into details but simply 
summarize the matter by saying that each group insisted on the 
necessity of acquiring that branch of knowledge which happened to 
be its speciality. The scholastic theologians insisted on scholastic 
theology because the unity of God, as well as His essence and 
attributes, is known through it. The jurists held out for jurisprudence 
because the acts of worship, the lawful and the unlawful as well as 
the forbidden and the permissible in daily conduct, are determined 
through it. Or in other words what the ordinary man needs in his 
everyday life, rather than under unusual conditions, is determined 
through it. Furthermore, the commentators and traditionists, holding 
that through it all sciences are attained, stood for the science of the 
Qur’an and the tradition. The Sufis pointed to Sufism as the branch 
of knowledge which was intended, some saying that it is the science 


22 


23 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


whereby the creature, realizing his position in relation to the divine, 
has a mystical experience [in communion with his God] . Other Sufis 
said that it comprises knowing what sincerity is and what the 
afflictions of the soul are, as well as being able to distinguish between 
the followers of God and the followers of Satan. Others again said 
that it was the esoteric science whose acquisition was required only 
of the qualified, select few, and accordingly they dismissed the 
accepted meaning of the word in favour of its esoteric connotation 

According to abu-Talib al-Makki, 1 what is meant [by the 
above-mentioned tradition] is knowledge of the contents of tradition 
which embodies the foundations of Islam, referred to in the following 
words of the Prophet: “Islam is built upon five pillars/’ 2 Since these 
five pillars are ordinances imposed by God, it is necessary to know 
how to fulfil them. The student, therefore, should be absolutely 
certain tliat knowledge, as we have already shown in the introduction 
to this book, is divided into the science of practical religion and the 
science of revelations. The scope of this discussion is confined to the 
science of practical religion. 

The [tenets of] practical religion which an adult and sane 
creature is obliged to observe deal with three things: beliefs, works, 
and prohibitions (lark, pi. tunik). For example, when a sane individual 
attains puberty and comes of age, his first obligation is learning the 
two words of die confession of faith (alshahadah) and understanding 
their meaning. These two words are: there is no god but Allah; 
Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah. He is not required to fully 
penetrate their significance through scrutiny, investigation, and 
research, but only to believe and confess them unequivocally without 
the least doubt or hesitation. The later is obtained by merely 
accepting on authority without any investigation or proof, since the 
Prophei required only mere acceptance and confession from the 

1 . Author of the famous Out al-Oulub (A.H. 386/A.D. 996). See ibn- 
Khallikan, Vol. D. p. 297, al-Sarrfani, Kitabal-Ansab ed. D.S.Margoliouth 
(Le Den, 1912) fol. 541a. 

2 These are the confession of faith, prayer, alms giving (zakah), the 
pilgrimage, and fasting* cf. al-Bukhari, Iman, 1 . al-Tirmidhi, 2. 1 man, 3; 
Ibn-Hanbal. Iman, 4. 

24 


ruffians among the Arabs without their learning any evidence.' Thus 
in accepting and confessing the two words, the person fulfils an 
obligation which is binding at that time. Accordingly, at that time, the 
branch of knowledge, whose acquisition is divinely ordained and 
binding for every Muslim, would consist in the learning and 

understanding ofthe two wordsoftheconfessionoffaith. Furthermore, 

at that stage, it is sufficient for them. This is shown by considering 
that if a Muslim dies upon accepting and confessing the two words 
ofthe confession of faith, he would die obedient to God and guilty of 
no rebellion. With the rise of new developments, however, there 
would be other obligations, but they w ould not necessarily be binding 
on every individual. On the contrary, it would be quite possible Ifor 
some] to be free of them. 

The new' developments may affect obligations regarding 
works, prohibitions, or beliefs. 

Regarding works, for example, if a person s life were to 
extend from dawn until noon, he would be required to learn how to 
perform his ablutions and pray because of the approaching noon 
hour. In such a case it would be wrong to say that it is obvious that 
he should persist in his study; [and if he finds that his life will extend 
beyond noon] and thinks that he might not be able to finish in time, 
[he should still persist] and perform his ablutions and pray before 
evening, however long this may be after the appointed hour In short 
he should give study primary' consideration regardless of the time 
required. In addition it can be said that the obligation to acquire 
knowledge, which is the prerequisite for works, is derived fium the 
obligation to perform works, in which case it might not even be 
obligatorv before sunset. This is also true of the other prayers. 

Further, should a person live until [the beginning of] 
Ramadan, he w'ould be obliged to leam all about fasting i.e., that it 
lasts from morning until sunset, that observing it requires resolve, 
abstinence from food, drink, and sexual intercourses as well as seeing 

1. Cf. Surah XLIX: 14; al-Taban, Jarm'la-Bayan (Cairo, 1323-30), Vol 

XXVI, pp. 89-91 where these are said to have been the Banu-Asad. 

23 


The Book of Knowledge 


the new moon personally [or accepting the word of two eye-witnesses 
instead ]. 1 Similarly, should a person come into some wealth, or on 
coming of age, inherit some, Ir should learn all about zakah. For 
although fillfilling the obligation is not immediately incumbent upon 
him, it would become so at the end of the first year after his 
acceptance of Islam. Should he possess nothing but camels, he would 
not need to learn the zakah of sheep, and the same is true of the other 
varieties [of wealth]. 

When, however, the months of pilgrimage begin, it will not be 
necessary for the person to start, at once, to learn how to make the 
pilgrimage; and since it is performed at leisure, learning how to do 
it is not immediately obligatory. Rather the learned men of Islam 
should point out to him that the pilgrimage is a divine ordiance to be 
observed, at leisure and convenience by every one who, as a man of 
means, has both the provisions and the means of transportation. This 
should be done in the hope of inducing the individual himself to 
resolve upon the pilgrimage. Should he so resolve, it would become 
necessary for him to learn how the pilgrimage is performed He 
would not need, however, to learn anything except its essentials and 
duties and not the voluntary acts of supererogation connected with it; 
for it performing the voluntary acts is supererogatory, so would its 
knowledge also be. and learning it, consequently, would not be a 
divine ordiance binding on all Muslim. (As to the unlawfulness of 
neglecting to point out that the pilgrimage is obligatory whenever the 
individual is able to perform it, there has been considerable speculation 
worthy of nothing but jurisprudence). The same reasoning applies to 
the knowledge of the other works which are divinely ordained and 
binding on all Muslims. 

As to prohibitions, the acquisition of the knowledge of which 
is obligatory, the obligation is conditioned by the rise of new 
developments and changed circumstances relevant to it, and varies 
w ith the conditions of the individual. Thus the mute is not obliged to 
know what is unlawful in speech nor the blind to know what things 


] . Words beween brackets only in C 


The Book of Knowledge 


are unlawful to see. Similarly the bedouin is not obliged to know' the 
houses in which it is unlawful to sit. All these obligations only apply 
within the limits of circumstance, and need not be learnt when it is 
certain that the question [of their applicability] will not arise. But 
whatever situation resembles these and may, therefore, be confused 
with them must be distinguished from them — as, for example, the 
case where an individual who, at the time of his embracing Islam, was 
in the habit of wearing silk garments, or possessed something 
illegally, or looked at a woman whom he could not legally marry. In 
such a case, he should be warned. On the other hand, whatever does 
not resemble these things and is, therefore, not confusing but to which 
one may be exposed through contact, - — such as food and drink — 
instruction concerning it is obligatory. Hence if an individual happens 
to be in a town where it is customary to dnnk wine and eat pork, it 
is imperative that he be taught concerning their prohibition and 
warned against using them. Moreover of all things in which instruction 
is obligatory, acquiring a knowledge of them is also obligatory. 

As to beliefs and actions of the heart, knowledge of them is 
obligatory according to the state of the nund Thus if one should feel 
any passing thought ( khatir ) l of doubt as to w hat the tw o w ords of 
the confession of faith mean, it w'ould be obligatory' upon him to 
acquire the knowledge of whatever would remove that doubt. If, on 
the other hand, he felt no such passing thought but died before he 
believed that the word of God — the Qur'an — is eternal, visible, and 
not a substratum for originated properties, as well as other often 
repeated articles of faith, he w ould have died a professing Muslim. 
These feelings of doubt which render the knowledge of the articles of 
faith obligatory' arise in the mind either naturally or as a result of 
hearing things in one’s own community. Thus in a town where 
rumours have spread and the people talk heresy, the individual 
should, in the early years of his maturity, be protected against such 
influence by being instructed in the [elements of] truth. If, on the other 


1 . PI Khawatir, signifying the occurrence in the mind of something w hich 
is quickly removed by another thought and w hich its owner is able to repel 
from the mind 


26 


27 




The Book of Knowledge 


hand, he were exposed to falsehood, it would become necessary to 
remove it from his heart, a task which might prove difficult. Again 
if this particular Muslim were a merchant living in the midst of a town 
where the practice of usury was prevalent it would be obligatory to 
warn him against usury. 

This, then is the truth concerning the knowledge whose 
acquisition is deemed an ordinance of God binding on everyone and 
no less binding on some because of its observance by others. The gist 
of it all is knowledge of how to perform works whose discharge is 
obligatory. Whoever, therefore, knows what works are obligatory' 
together with the time of their discharge, the same possesses the 
knowledge whose acquisition is fard'ayn . Furthermore, w'hat the 
Sufis hold relative to the understanding of the thoughts of the enemy 
and [those] of the company of heaven ( lummat al-mulk ) is also true, 
though only to those who apply themselves to it. If, however, man 
does not for the most part refrain from the impulses of evil, 
hypocrisy, and envy , he should seek to acquire whatever knowledge 
he may feel he needs from the Quarter on the Destructive Matters of 
Life. How can he neglect this obligation when the Apostle of God 
said, “Three things in life are destructive; sordid avarice, vehement 
passion and self-conceit, ’ and no man can refrain from these. The 
rest of what w e shall mention of the reprehensible conditions of the 
heart such as pride, conceit, etc., all follow from these three 
aforementioned destructive matters of life. Their eradication is a 
fard ayn. It is, however, not possible except through a knowledge of 
the nature of these destructive matters of life, as well as their causes, 
symptoms, and cure; as he who knows not evil falls into it. A cure is, 
in reality, confronting a cause with its opposite. How could such a 
thing be possible without a knowledge of both cause and effect? Most 
of the things w'e have mentioned in the Quarter on the Destructive 
Matters of Life belong to the fard ayn class which have been totally 
neglected by the people in favour of pursuing things which do not 
matter. 

Among the things about which w'e should proceed to inform 
the individual, in case they have not yet been transmitted from one 


The Book of Knowledge 


people to another, are belief in Paradise, hell, the day of resurrection 
and the day of judgement in order that he may believe and accept 
them, as they are the continuation of the words of the confession of 
faith. This is required because after the acceptance of Muhammad's 
prophethood, the message which he conveyed, namely that whoever 
should obey God and His Apostle would enter Paradise, and whoever 
should disobey them would enter hell-fire, should be understood. If. 
therefore, you would pay attention to this reasoning you would know 
that this is the true way of life. You would also find out that every 
servant suffers, in the course of his life, both during the day and the 
night from enduring thoughts ( waqa i) 1 [of doubt] which befall him 
in the performance of his acts of worship and daily transactions. 
These thoughts require new obligations and consequently it becomes 
necessary for him to inquire concerning every unusual occurrence 
which may happen to him as well as to proceed to learn what may be 
generally expected to occur in the near future. 

Finally, if it should become clear that what the Prophet meant 
by his words, “Seeking knowledge is an ordiance obligator} upon 
every Muslim, M is knowledge with the definite article, namely the 
know ledge of only those works which arc well known to be obligator} 
upon every Muslim, the line of this reasoning would become apparent 
as would also the time in which these obligations shou Id be discharged . 
God, however, knows best. 

On knowledge whose Acquisition is deemed 
Fard Kifayah 

It should be known that a necessary duty is not distinguished 
from other duties except when the different sciences are enumerated. 
These are divided, in relation to the kind of duties we are now 
considering, into sacred (sharivah) and profane (ghayr shar iyah) 
sciences. By sacred sciences I mean those w hich have been acquired 


l Sing, waqi'ah. signifying a thought which appears in the mind and 
remains there, and \v hich. unlike Khajir the owner has no means whatever 
of repelling 


28 


29 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


from the prophets and are not arrived at either by reason, like 
arithmetic, or by experimentation, like medicine, or by hearing, like 
language. 

Profane sciences are divided into praiseworthy ( mahmud ), 
blameworthy ( madhmum ), and permissible ( mubah ). Praiseworthy 
sciences are those on whose knowledge the activities of this life 
depend such as medicine and arithmetic. They are divided into 
sciences the acquisition of the knowledge of which isfard kifayah and 
into sciences the acquisition of the knowledge of which is meritorious 
though not obligatory . Sciences whose knowledge is deemed fard 
kifayah comprise every sciences which are indispensable for the 
welfare of this world such as: medicine which is necessary' for the life 
of the body, arithmetic for daily transactions and the division of 
legacies and inheritances, as well as others besides. These are the 
sciences which, because of their absence, a community would be 
reduced to narrow straits. But should one who can practise them rise 
in that community', it would suffice and the obligation to acquire their 
knowledge would cease to be binding upon the rest of the community. 

No one should be astonished when we say that medicine as 
well as arithmetic are of the sciences which ar efard kifayah, because 
the fundamental industries are also the same, such as agriculture, 
weaving, politics, even cupping and tailoring. For should a town lack 
a cupper extinction would overtake its people and they would be 
driven to expose themselves to destruction. Has not He who has sent 
down the malady also sent down the remedy, given guidance for its 
use, and prepared the means for administering it? It is not, therefore, 
permissible to expose oneself to destruction bv neglecting the 
remedy. 

To go deep into the details of arithmetic and the nature of 
medicine a well as such details which, while not indispensable, are 
helpful in reinforcing the efficacy of whatever is necessary', is, 
however, considered meritorious, not obligatory'. 

The blameworthy ( Madhmum ) sciences are magic, talismanic 
science, juggling, trickery' and the like. 

30 


The sacred sciences which are intended in this study are all 
praiseworthy. Sometime, however, they may be confused with what 
may be taken for praiseworthy but, in fact, are blameworthy. For this 
reason sacred sciences are divided into praiseworthy and blameworthy 
sciences: 

The praiseworthy sciences comprise sources {usul), branches 
{Furu *), auxiliary ( muqaddimat ), and supplementary ( mutammimat ) . 
There are, therefore, four kinds: 

First come the sources ( usul) which are four in number: the 
Book of God (i.e. the Qur’an). The Usage ( sunnah ) of His Prophet, 
The Agreement ( ijma ') of all Muslims, and the traditions relating to 
the Companions (athar al-sahabah). Agreement, in so far as it 
evinces usage, isasource. Like traditions relating to the Companions, 
however, which is also evince usage, agreement is a secondary- 
source. This is because the Companions have witnessed the revelations 
and have, through their close association with the Prophet 
comprehended what others have failed to see. Since, however, it is 
possible that words will not fully express what has been so 
comprehended, the learned men have deemed it fit to follow' the 
example of the Companions and hold fast to their tradition though on 
a certain condition and in a special manner as the one concerned may 
see. It is, however, not appropriate to discuss it in this section. 

Second are the branches {furu “). They are what has been 
drawn from the sources {usul), not according to the literal meaning 
but through meanings which are adduced by the mind thereby 
widening the understanding until a meaning differing from the literal 
is indicated, as for example, indicated by the words of the Prophet: 
“The judge should not sit in judgment while angry.” 1 namely that he 
should not sit in judgment while constipated or hungry or suffering 
from a painful disease. This last thing may be of two kinds: the first 
pertains to the activities of this world and is contained in the books 
of law and entrusted to the lawyers, the learned men of this world; the 
second pertains to the activities of the hereafter. It is the science of 

1 . Cf. al-Bukhari , Ahkam, 1 3; ibn-hiajah. Ahkam, 4. 

31 



The Book of Knowledge 


the conditions of the heart, its praiseworthy and blameworthy 
characteristics, what is acceptable before God and what is 
reprehensible to Him All these are treated in the last part of this book, 
i.e., the whole book of The Revival of the Sciences of Religion. It 
includes the knowledge of what issues from the heart and affects the 
senses in their acts of worship and usage of life, all of w hich are 
treated in the first part of this book. 

Third are the auxiliary ( muqaddimat ). These act as the 
instrument for the sacred sciences. Thus linguistic science and 
syntax are but instruments for the knowledge of the Book of God and 
the usage (sunnah) of His Prophet. In themselves linguistic science 
and syntax are not of the sacred sciences, but it has become necessary 
to engage in their study because of the law since this law has come 
in the language of the Arabs. And w’hereas every law is revealed 
through the medium of a particular language, the learning of the 
language becomes an instrument wherewith to learn the law Among 
these instruments also is the science of writing. It is, how ever, not a 
necessary instrument because the Apostle of God was himself 
unlettered ( ummi ).' And if it were conceivable that retention of 
whatever is heard was at all possible, man might have dispensed with 
writing. But, because of the impossibility of such a thing, it has 
become, on the whole, necessary. 

Fourth are the supplementary (mutammimat) w hich, in relation 
to the science of the Qur'an, are divided into what pertains to 
pronunciation such as learning the different readings and the 
enunciation of the different letters, and into what pertains to exposition 
which also rests on authoritative transmission. This is because 
language alone cannot treat exposition or its technicalities such as the 
knowledge of the abrogating ( nasikh ) and the abrogated ( mansukh ), 
the general ( amm) and the particular (khas), the express laws of the 
Qur'an as well as its manifest meaning, and finally the manner of 
their application, i.e.. the science which is called the principles of 
jurisprudence (usul alfiqh ), which also includes sunnah. 

~ A i S o illiterate. Cf. Surah VD: 1 56. The word probably means ignorant of 

the scriptures, or. more accurately, a layman. 


32 


The Book of Knowledge 


In connection with tradition and history', the supplementary 
sciences are biography, dealing mainly with the lives of illustrious 
men and ofthe Companions, knowledgeofthe trustworthy transmitters 
of traditions and their peculiarities, in order to distinguish between 
w'eak (da ‘ if) and strong ( qcrwi ) traditions, and of their ages in order 
to differentiate between those traditions whose chain of authorities is 
incomplete or lacking ( mursal ) and those whose chain of authorities 
goes back to the Prophet (musnad), as well as knowledge of whatever 
is connected with it. 

These, then, are the sacred sciences. Not only are they all 
praiseworthy, but they also belong to the category of the fard 
kifayah. But should one inquire saying, “Why have you appended 
jurisprudence to secular sciences and grouped jurisprudents among 
secular scholars?” Let me tell you that God made Adam from earth 
and his offspring from clay and running w'ater. He brought them out 
front loins to womb, then to life, and finally to the grave; from the 
grave He raised them to judgment and from there to Paradise or to 
hell-fire. Such was therefore their beginning, such their end, and such 
their abodes. Furthermore, God has created this world in preparation 
for the hereafter in order to gather suitable provisions therefrom. If 
these provisions were gathered justly, dissensions would have ceased 
and the jurisprudents would have become idle. But since men have 
with greed gathered their provisions, dissensions ensued and 
consequently the need for a magistrate to rule them arose. In turn the 
magistrate felt the need for a canon with which to govern the people. 
It is the jurisprudent, though, who has the knowledge of the rules of 
government and the methods of mediation between the people 
whenever, because of their greed, they contend. He thus becomes the 
teacher of the magistrates and their guide in government and control, 
that through their righteousness the affairs of men in this world may- 
be set in order. 

Upon my life I declare that jurisprudence is also connected 
with religion, not directly but indirectly through the affairs of this 
world, because this world is the preparation for the hereafter, and 
there is no religion without it. Furthermore, the state and religion are 

33 


4 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


twins. Religion is the foundation whiles the state is the guard. That 
which has no foundation will certainly crumble and that which has 
no guard is lost. Without the magistrates there is neither government 
nor control, and the correct way to settle dissensions is through law. 
And as government by magistrates does not belong primarily to the 
science of religion but is an adjunct to that without which there is no 
religion, so is the knowledge of the manner of government. Thus it is 
well known that it is not possible to carry out the pilgrimage without 
the protection of an escort of bedouins along the route. But the 
pilgrimage itself is one thing, setting out on the road to pilgrimage is 
another, policing the route without which it is not possible to perform 
the pilgrimage is still another, and the knowledge of the manner of 
policing the route with all its rules and regulations is again another. 
The result of jurisprudence is knowledge of the methods of government 
and control . This is attested by a tradition whose chain of authorities 
goes back to the Prophet, namely, “People will not be judged except 
by three: a governor, a deputy, and an intruder.” 1 The governor is the 
imam [the imams have (always) been the judges]; the deputy is his 
lieutenant, while anyone else is an intruder who undertakes that 
responsibility without there being any need for him to do so. As a 
matter of feet it was the custom of the Companions to avoid giving 
legal opinions to the extent that each was in the habit of referring [the 
question] to his colleague, although they did not avoid answering 
questi ons relative to the science of die Qur'an and the path of the 
hereafter. In some recensions the word hypocrite appears instead of 
the word intruder [and rightly so] because anyone who, without any 
special need, undertakes the responsibility of giving legal opinions, 
does so for the sake of acquiring positionand wealth. 

If you agree td this, the same will hold true in connection with 
the rules of invalidating testimonies, restrictive ordinances 
indemnities and settling feuds; but it will not hold true in respect to 
what fall* under the Quarter on the Acts ofWorship such as fasting 
and prayer, nor in respect to what the Usages of Life entart'of civil 
and legal matters such as determining the lawful and the unlawful. 

1 . Cf. al-Darimi, Sunan. Raqa'iq, 63. 


You should, therefore, know that what the jurisprudent comes 
nearest discussing under works which pertain to the hereafter are 
four. 1 Islam, prayer, almsgiving, doing what is lawful and abstaining 
from what is unlawful. But when you example how far the 
jurisprudent’s speculation goes into these four you will find that it 
does Hot go beyond the limits of this world into the next. If then you 
realize this limitation in respect to these four it becomes to you more 
evident in others besides. 

Concerning Islam the jurisprudent discourses on what renders 
it sound or unsound as well as on its conditions, but only pays 
attention to outward confession. The heart, however, is removed 
from his domain because the Apostle set apart from the jurisprudent 
those who wield the sword and those in whose hand the reins of 
temporal power lie. This the Apostle did when he said to the man who 
had killed another because the latter had recited the confession of 
faith giving for a reason his fear of the sword, “Have you examined 
his heart?” 2 The jurisprudent also determines with the aid of the 
sword the soundness of one’s Islam although he knows that the sword 
can neither reveal to him the intentions of the individual nor remove 
from his heart the veil of ignorance and bewilderment. He is, 
however, counsellor to him who wields the sword. Since the sword 
can reach the individual’s neck, and the hand his possessions, 
repeating the confession of faith with the tongue protects his life and 
possessions as long as he has either in this world. For this reason the 
Prophet said, “I was ordered to fight people until they say, ‘There is 
no other god but God. When they say this they render their lives and 
possessions immune against my hand.” 3 He thus confined the 
efficacys of verbal confession to life and possessions; but in the 
hereafter mere words do not avail — only the illumination of the 
hearts by the divine light, their secret thoughts, and their sincerity do 
avail. These, however, do not fall within the field of jurisprudence 
although the jurisprudent may delve into them as he might also delve 
into theology and medicine, both of which are outside his field. 


I. Text-three. 2. Muslim, Iman, 39. 

1. Cf Ibn-Majah, Iman, 16, Muslim, Iman, 6; al-Bakhan, Iman 16. 


34 


35 





The Book of Knowledge 


Concerning prayer, the jurisprudent is entitled to give his 
opinion as to whether or not it has been correctly performed in 
accordance with the prescribed regulations, regardless of the fact 
that the worshipper, from the beginning to the end, might not have 
paid attention to any part of his prayer except the magnificat 
( takbir ),' but has instead busied himself in going over his market 
transactions. Such a prayer is of no use for the hereafter just as verbal 
confession of Islam is also of no use. Nevertheless, the jurisprudent 
does pass judgment regarding its soundness, namely whether or not 
the worshipper has, in what he has performed, fulfilled the 
Requirements of the law and has thereby rendered himself immune to 
Execution and punishment. To the subject of submitting and presenting 
the heart to God, however, both of which are works pertaining to the 
hereafter and through which works are rendered efficacious, the 
jurisprudent does not address himself; and in case he does, he 
oversteps his bounds. 

Concerning almsgiving, the jurisprudent examines what 
satisfies the demand of the magistrate so that in the event that the 
payment of the alms is withheld and, consequently, the magistrate 
exacts it by force, the jurisprudent then rules that the responsibility 
of the magistrate has been fulfilled. It is related that Abu-Y usuf,* the 
judge, was in the habit of giving away all his income to his wife at the 
end of each year and in turn making her give away hers to him in order 
to avoid the' payment of alms. On being informed of it, abu-Hanifeh 3 
declared that that was the result of abu-Yusuf s versatility' in 
jurisprudence; and abu-Hanifeh was right because such a filing is the 
result of worldly wisdom. Nevertheless, its harm in the hereafter 
outweighs every- benefit it may yield in this world. Moreover, such 
knowledge is harmful. 

1 The takbir consists of the repetition of the words AUahu-akbar meaning 
‘God is great.” 

2 Ya'qub ibrt-Ibrahim ibn-Habib (AH. 182/A.D. 798); author of the Kitab 
a'-Kharaj See ibn-Khaltikan, Vol. ID, pp. 334-42. 

3 Al-Nu‘man ibn-Thabit. (A.H. 150 A.D. 767) founder of the Hanafite 
school of law and teacher of abu-Yusuf. See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. ni, pp. 
74-80. 


The Book of Knowledge 


Concerning the lawful and the unlawful, abstinence from the 
latter is a part of religion. Piety, moreover, has four grades. The first 
is that piety which is required for just testimony and the relinquishing 
of which disqualifies man to bear witness before a court, or to be a 
judge, or to act as a governor. It consists, in other words, in avoiding 
all that is clearly unlawful. 

The second is the piety of honest men which guards against 
dubiosities which engender ambiguous and misleading interpretations. 
Thus the Prophet said, “Discard that which is dubious for that which 
is indubious .” 1 He also said, “Sin is heart-alluring. 

The third is the piety of the godly which entails desisting from 
perfectly lawful deeds for fear they may lead to deeds which are 
unlawful. In this connection the Prophet said, “No man will be 
numbered among the godly unless he is wont to avoid what is 
harmless for fear of what is harmful . ” 2 Of Such is the reluctance to 
discuss the affairs of people lest one be drawn into backbiting, and 
the abstinence from eating or drinking of things which whet the 
appetite lest that should stimulate passion and lust which lead man 
to commit that which is forbidden. 

The fourth is the piety of the saints which shuns all things but 
God for fear of expending one single hour of life in things which, 
although it is clear and certain that they lead to nothing unlawful, do 
not help to bring the individual nearer to God. 

All these grades of piety, except the first, namely the piety of 
witnesses and judges as well as what militates against justice, are 
outside the domain of die jurisprudent. Furthermore, to comply with 
the requirements of this first grade of piety does not preclude sin 
being punished in the hereafter. The Prophet said to Wabisah. 
“Consult your own heart although you have been given a dispensation 

1 . Al-Tayalisi, Ho. 1 1 78. 

2. Ibn-Majah, al-Wara *w-al~Taqwa t 1 

3. Abu-Salim Wabisah ibn-Ma’bad al-Asadi, one of the Companions of the 

Prophet; he embraced Islam in A.H. 9/A.D. 630. See Vol. VII, Pt. 2, p. 1 76, 

Tahdhib al-Asma\ p. 61 1 


36 


37 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


once, twice to thrice.” 1 2 3 4 The jurisprudent does not, and should not, 
express an opinion regarding the things which allure and perplex the 
heart, or how to deal with them but confines his opinion to those 
things which militate against justice. Hence tbs entire scope of the 
jurisprudent’s domain is limited to the affairs of this world which 
pave the road to the hereafter. Should he then touch upon the 
attributes of die heart and die rules of the hereafter, he does so as an 
intruder just as he would be whenever anything relative to medicine, 
arithmetic, astronomy and theology' confronts him. The same is true 
of philosophy in relation to syntax or poetry'. Sufvan al-Thawri, an 
authority in exoteric knowledge used to say that the study of this 
science is not among the provisions for the hereafter. How could it 
be when it is agreed that the value of knowledge is acting according 
to its precepts? Is is possible, therefore, to hold as provisions for the 
hereafter the knowledge of the forms that divorce might take, either 
zihar 2 or by li 'an? of contracts involving immediate payment of the 
price and admitting delay in the delivery' of the article purchased 
( salam) A , of hire, rental, and lease ( ijarah ), 5 and of money-changing 
( sarj )? 6 Anyone who acquires the knowledge of these things, hoping 
thereby to draw nearer to God, would certainly be mad. Indeed, 
nothing but engaging body and soul in the service of God and His 
worship would draw people nearer to God; and nobility lies in 
knowing how to accomplish these deeds. 

1. Al-Darimi , Buyu’,2. 

2. A form of divorce by the formula: an it 'alayva kazahr ummi (thou art to 
me as my mother ‘s back). This is reminiscent of pre-Islamic practice. Cf 
Surah LVIII: 2; a l -Bukhari, Talaq, 23, ibn-Majah, Talaq, 25. 

3. A form of divorce which takes place under the foil owing circumstances, 
if a man accuses his wife of adultery and does not prove it by four 
witnesses v he must swear before God that he is telling the truth and then 
add. “Ifl am aii»rmay God curse me”. The wife then says, ”1 sw ear before 
God that my husband lies;” and then adds, ‘ May God s wrath be upon me 
if this man be telling the truth.” After this the divorce takes place ipso 
facto. Cf Surah XXtV: 6; a l -Bukhari, Talaq, 4, 25, 27-36. ibn-Majah, 
Talaq, 27. 

4. See al-Bukhari , Salami al-Sayyid al-Shanf al-Jurjani, al-Ta rifat, ed. G. 
Flugei (Leipzig, 1845^ p. 126. 

5. See al-Bukhari, Ijarah. 6. See al-Bukhari, Shirkah, 10. 


If you should say, “Why have you regarded medicine and 
jurisprudence in the same way when medicine pertains to the affairs 
ofthis world, namelythewelfareofthe body, while upon jurisprudence 
depends the welfare of religion; and furthermore does not this equal 
regard of the two violate the public consensus of opinion among all 
Muslims?” Then know that such a treatment is not necessary and in 
fact the two sciences differ. Jurisprudence is superior to medicine on 
three counts ; first because it is sacred knowledge and unlike medicine, 
which is not sacred knowledge, jurisprudence is derived from 
prophecy; second, it is superior to medicine because no one of those 
who are treading the road to the hereafter can do without it, neither 
the healthy nor the ailing; while on the other hand only the sick, who 
are a minority, need medicine; thirdly, because jurisprudence is akin 
to the science of the road of the hereafter, being a study of the works 
or the senses. The origin of these works as well as their source lies 
in the attributes of the heart. Thus praiseworthy works are the result 
of praiseworthy characters endowed with saving grace in hereafter; 
similarly the blameworthy works are the result of blameworthy 
characters. The connection between the senses and the heart is thus 
clear. 

Health and disease, however, result from certain qualities in 
the numours characteristics of the body, not of the heart No matter 
how often jurisprudence is compared with medicine, the superiority 
of the former is evident. Similarly, whenever the science of the road 
of the hereafter is compared with jurisprudence the superiority of the 
former is evident. 

If you should say, “Explain to me the science of the road of 
the hereafter in such a manner as will bring out its outline if the 
inquiry into its details is not possible,” know, then, that it is divided 
into two parts: the science of revelation and the science of practical 
religion. 

The science of revelation is the science of esoterics which is the 
goal of all sciences. One of the Gnostics said, “I fear that whoever 
should lack a portion of that science would come upon evil end.” The 


38 


39 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


least portion of the science of revelation is believing in it and placing 
it in die hands of those worthy of it. Another said, “Whoever has 
these two characteristics, heresy and pride, will never be blessed with 
any of this science”. It was also said, ‘’Whoever loves God 
succeeds, but whoever loves this world and persists in his desires will 
not attain the science of revelation, though he might attain the other 
sciences.” The least punishment which the person who denies 
revelation will suffer is that he will not be blessed with any of its gifts. 
Thus a poet said: 

“In his absence from the side, 

Let his penalty abide.” 

Furthermoi e, the science of revelation is the science concerned 
with the saints and the favourites of God. It stands for a light which 
shines in the heart when it is cleansed and purified of its blameworthy 
qualities. Through this light is revealed the truth of several things, 
whose names have hitherto often been heard, and to which ambiguous 
and obscure meanings have been attached. Through it, these truths 
are clarified until the true knowledge of the essence of God is attained 
together with that of His eternal and perfect attributes. His works and 
wisdom in the creation of this world and the hereafter as well as the 
reason for His exalting the latter over the former. Through it also is 
attained the knowledge of the meaning of prophecy and prophet and 
the import of revelation. Through it is obtained the truth about Satan, 
the meaning of the words angels and devils, and the cause of the 
enmity between Satan and man. Through it is known how the Angel 
appeared to the prophets and how they received the divine revelation. 
Through it is achieved the knowledge of the kingdom of heaven and 
earth, as well as the knowledge of the heart and how the angelic hosts 
have confronted the devils. Through it is gained the knowledge of 
how to distinguish between the company of heaven and the company 
of the Devil, a knowledge of the hereafter. Paradise, and hell fire, the 
punishment of the grave, the bridge ( al-sirat )' across the infernal 

1 . See ibn-Klajah , bath, 8. 


fire, the balance 1 of the judgment-day, and knowledge of the day of 
reckoning . 2 Through it also is comprehended the meaning of the 
following words of God: “Read thy Book; there needeth none but 
thyself to make out an account against thee this day ;” 3 and, “Truly 
the hereafter is life indeed !” 4 Through this same light is revealed the 
meaning of meeting God and seeing His gracious face: the meaning 
of being close to Him and of occupying a place in His proximity; the 
meaning of attaining happiness through communion with the 
heavenly hosts and association with the angels and the prophets. 
Through it also the distinction between the ranks of the people in the 
different heavens is determined until they see one another in the same 
way as Venus is seen in the heart of heaven. Many other things which 
w ould require a great deal of time to explain because people, once 
they accept them in principle, take different stands with regard to 
their significations, are also determined through this light. Thus, 
some would regard all these as mere examples holding that the eye 
has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of 
man that which God has prepared for His righteous servants , 5 and 
that man knows nothing of Paradise except its attributes and names: 
others hold that some are mere patterns and some are identical with 
the realities which their names signify'. Likewise others hold that the 
limit to which our knowledge of God can reach is to admit the 
inability to know Him. There are some also who claim great things 
on the subject of knowing God while others say that we cannot go 
beyond what all the common people have reached, namely that God 
is omniscient and omnipotent, that He hears and sees, and that He 
speaks. We, therefore, mean by the science of revelation that science 
w'hereby the cover is removed so that the truth regarding these things 
becomes as clear as if it were seen by the eye, leaving thereby no room 
for any doubt. Man would, by himself, be capable of such a thing had 
not rust resulting from the filth of this world accumulated over the 
surface of the mirror of his heart. By the science of the road of the 
hereafter we mean the knowledge of how to remove from the surface 

T. C/ Surah XXI: 47; XLD; 16. T Cf Surah XL: 28. 

3. Surah XVU: 15. 4. Surah XXIX: 64. 

5. Cf. Is 64:4, 1 Cor. 2: 9, also al-Darimi, Raqa’iq, 105. 


40 


4 i 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


ofthis mirrorthat filth which bars the knowing ofGod, His attributes, 
and His works. The mirror is cleansed and purified by desisting from 
lust and emulating the prophets in all their states. Thus to whatever 
extent the heart is cleansed and made to face the truth, to that same 
extent will it reflect His reality. But there is no way to this except 
through discipline [which will be discussed in its proper place], 
learning, and instruction. 

These sciences are not recorded in books and are not discussed 
by him whom God has blessed with any of them except among his 
own circle of intimates who partake with him of them through 
discourses and secret communication. This last method is nothing 
but the occult science which the Prophet had in mind when he said, 
“Verily of knowledge is a branch that resembles a hidden thing; no 
one grasps it except those who know God; whenever they declare it 
no one fails to recognize it except those who know not God. Despise 
not, therefore, a learned man whom God has blessed with this 
knowledge because God Himself does not despise that man once He 
has imparted to him that knowledge.” 

The second part, namely the science of practical religion, is the 
science of the states of the heart, of which the praiseworthy are 
fortitude, gratitude, fear, hope, resignation, devotion, piety, 
contentment, generosity, recognition of one’s obligation to God 
under all circumstances, charity, good faith, morality, fellowship, 
truthfulness, and sincerity. To know the truth concerning these states 
as well as their definitions and the means whereby they are attained, 
together with their fruits and signs, and tending whatever states has 
been weakened until it becomes strong again and whatever has 
disappeared until it reappears, belongs to the science of the hereafter . 
On the other hand, the blameworthy, such as the fear of poverty, 
discontent with one’s lot, bitterness, rancour, envy, deceit, ambition, 
the desire to be praised, the passion to live long in this life for the sake 
of indulgence, pride, hypocrisy, anger, scorn, enmity, hatred, greed 
niggardliness, lust, extravagance, frivolity, insolence, exalting the 
rich and despising the poor, haughtiness, vanity, vaunting, boasting 
holding oneself above turn, medling in things not of one’s concern. 


loquacity, obstinacy, currying favour, adulation, conceit, being 
diverted from attending to one’s own faults by being occupied with 
other people’s shortcomings, the vanishing of grief from the heart 
and the departure of fear of God from it, extreme self-pity whenever 
in affliction, lukewarm support for truth, outwardly professing 
friendship and secretly fostering enmity, taking advantage of God’s 
patience and long suffering and persisting in taking away from men 
what God has given them trusting only in trickery, dishonesty and 
fraud, vain optimism, cruelty, rudeness, satisfaction in worldly 
pleasures and dejection at their loss, delight in the company of people 
and loneliness when they depart, harshness, levity, haste, lack of 
shame and lack of mercy — these and many similar qualities of the 
heart are the seed-beds of immoralities and the nursery-gardens of 
turpitudes . The opposite of these, namely the praiseworthy traits, and 
the fountain-head of all good works. To know the definitions of these 
traits the truth concerning each, the means whereby they are attained 
as well as their fruits and cures comprise the science of the hereafter 
whose acquisition, according to the legal opinion of the learned men 
of that science, is fard'ayn Whoever should turn away from this 
knowledge, would, in the hereafter be destroyed by the wrath of the 
King of Kings, just as he who would fail to perform the civil duties 
would, according to the legal opinion of the jurisprudents of the 
world, be cut down by the sword of the temporal rulers of this world. 
The judgement ofthe jurisprudents concerning obligatory ordinances 
( fard'ayn ) relates to the welfare of life in this world, while the 
judgment of the learned men of the science of the hereafter relates to 
the welfare of life in the hereafter. Thus if a jurisprudent were asked 
concerning the meaning of any of these terms, as for example: 
sincerity, or dependence, or precaution against hypocrisy, he would 
hesitate to express an opinion although every one of these is an 
obligatory ordiance in whose neglect lies his own destruction in the 
hereafter. But should you inquire from him concerning the li an form 
of divorce or the zihar form, or concerning wager (sabaa) 1 and target 
shooting he would recite to you volumes of minute details which 
would never be used or needed; and in the event a need might arise 
1 . See ibn-Majah, Jihad: 44 


42 


43 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


for some of them the community would not lack someone who could 
render this service and spare the jurisprudent the trouble and labour 
of his studies. He thus persists labouring day and night on these 
details trying to memorize and leam them, but the things which are 
of real importance in religion, he overlooks. Should he, then, be 
questioned about it, he would say that he had pursued it because it 
was the science of religion and also a fard kifayah, confusing thereby 
i. nself and others by these excuses. The intelligent person knows 
that if, in performing the fard kifayah, the aim of the jurisprudent has 
been to do the right things, he should have given precedence to the 
fard ‘ay n and to several others of the fard kifayah. How many a town 
has no physician except from among the followers of protected 
religions (dhimmah) whose testimony, according to the laws of 
jurisprudence, should not be accepted. However, we see no Muslim 
practising medicine, but on the contrary all rave in jurisprudence, 
especially in controversy and polemics. Furthermore, the town is 
crowded with jurisprudent employed in giving legal opinions and 
defending cases. Would that 1 knew why the learned men of religion 
permit work in activities which are fard kifayah and which have been 
performed by quite a number of people to the neglect of other fard 
kifayah activities which have not yet been performed. Could there be 
anv other reason for this except that medicine does not lead to 
management of religious endowments (awqaf), execution of wills, 
possession of the money of orphans, and appointment to judicial and 
government positions through which one exalts himself above his 
fellowmen and fastens his yoke upon his enemies? Indeed the science 
of religion has been destroyed because the learned men have espoused 
evil. God is, therefore, our help and refuge. May God protect us from 
this delusion, displeasing to Him and pleasing to the Devil . The pious 
among the learned men in exoteric knowledge used to acknowledge 
the excellence of the learned men in esoteric knowledge ( ‘ilm al- 
batiri) and the advocates of the inward knowledge of the heart. 

Imam al-Shafi‘i was in the habit of sitting before Shay ban al- 


Ra‘i,‘ just as a boy would sit in the school, and would ask concerning 
one thing or another, to which Shayban would reply, “Would one like 
you ask the advice of this bedouin?” Al-shafi‘i would say, “This 
agrees with what we already know.” Ahmad ibn-Hanbal and Y ahya 
ibn-‘Ma‘in 2 used to call upon Ma‘ruf al-Karkhi 3 who, in exoteric 
knowledge ( ‘ilm al-zahar) was not their equal; nevertheless they 
used to seek his advice. And why should they not have done so? Had 
not the Prophet, when he was asked, “What shall we do when we are 
confronted by something which we cannot find in either the Qur'an 
or the tradition?” said, “Ask the honest men among you and guide 
your affairs by consultation?” 4 For that reason it has been said that 
the learned men of exoteric knowledge are the ornament of the earth 
and the state, while the learned men of esoteric knowledge are the 
ornaments of heaven and its kingdom Al-Junavd s said, “Once upon 
a time my teacher al-Sari 6 asked me saying. ‘When you leave my 
place whose company do you keep?' I said, 'Al-Muhasibi's To 
which he replied, ‘Well have you chosen! Follow his learning and 
culture, but avoid his affectation in speech and his refutation of the 
theologians.’ Upon leaving I overheard him say, ‘May God make 
thee first a traditionist and then a Sufi rather than a Sufi first and then 
a traditionist’.” This is a reference to the fact that he who first 
acquires versatility in tradition and learning and then turns to Sufism 
comes off well, he who takes to Sufism before learning exposes 
himself to danger. 

Should you sav, “Why did you, in your classification of the 
sciences, make no mention of theology and philosophy and not show 

1 . A.H. 1 58/A.D. 744; see Fihrist p. 1 84, 1-2. 

2. A.H. 233/A.D. 847-8; see Film st y p. 231 ; Tadhkiratal-Huffaz Vo! D, pp. 
16-17. 

3. A.H. 200/A:D. 815-16; see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. D, pp. 551-3. 

4. Cf Surah XLII: 36. 

5 . Abu-al-Qasim al-Junayd ibn-Muhammad ibn-al-Junayd al-Khazzaz ( A . H. 
297/A. D. 909-10; seeibn-Khallikan, Vol pp 208-9* 

6. Abu-al-Hasan ibn-al-Mughallis, al-Saqati (A.H 256/A. D 870); see ibn- 
Khallikan, Vol I, pp. 356-8 

7. AI-Harith ibn-Asad ( A H 24 3/A. D. 857-8); see Fihrist, p 1 84 For his life 
and teaching, see Margaret Smith,.-!/? Early Mystic of Baghdadi London. 
1935) 


44 


45 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


whether they are blameworthy or praiseworthy?” then know that all 
that theology offers in the way of useful evidence is contained in the 
Qur’an and tradition. Whatever evidence is not contained therein is 
either reprehensible argumentation [which, as will be seen, is an 
innovation] or mere wrangling by dwelling on distinctions or 
amplification through the array of different opinions, most of which 
are derived and nonsence, despised by the mind and rejected by the 
ears, while others are ramblings into things unrelated to religion and 
not customary during the first period of Islam. To enter into such 
discussions at all was then regarded heresy, but things have now 
changed. Innovations which turn people from the dictates of the 
Qur’an and the tradition have arisen and a group has emerged who 
made imitations of the Book and the hadith and based upon it false 
specu lation, so that certain dangerous things have necessarily become 
permissible; they have become as binding as the fard kifayah. To 
such an extent would an innovator go whenever he purposes to 
preach a heresay. We shall discuss this briefly in the following 
chapter. 

As to philosophy, it is not itself a single branch of science but 
comprises four; the first includes geometry and arithmetic, both of 
which are, as has already been said, permissible and no one is barred 
from them except the person who might be led by their study to 
blameworthy sciences, for most of those who practise them have 
stepped over to innovations. Thus the weakling is barred from the 
study of geometry and arithmetic just as the boy is barred from the 
bank of the river lest he should fall into the water, and as the newly 
converted Muslim is kept away from the company of unbelievers for 
fear he might be influenced by them. In this last case not even the 
strong is called upon to mix with the unbelievers. 

The second is logic which is a study of the nature of evidence 
and its conditions as well as the nature of a definition and its 
conditions. Both of these are included under theology. 

The third is divinity which is the science of the being and 
attributes of God. This also is included under theology. 


Furthermore the philosophers have not, in their philosophy, 
developed another type of sciences, but have branched out into 
several schools, of which some are systems of unbelief and others of 
innovation. Thus just as the Mu’tazlite system does not in itself 
represent a branch of science, but its protagonists, as a group of 
theologians and specialists in the art of philosophical disputation, 
have been distinguished by their erroneous views, so are the 
philosophers. 

The fourth is physics of which some parts contradict the law 
and the true religion, and are, therefore, folly. These are not science 
that they may be classified under sciences. Others are a study of the 
qualities of the different substance, their properties, transmutation, 
and change. This part resembles the researches of physicians, except 
that the physician studies the human body, particularly the cause of 
its diseases and cures, while the physicists study all substance from 
the standpoint of change and motion. 

Medicine, however, is superior to physics because the former 
is needed while for the latter there is no need. 

Therefore theology has become one of the disciplines which is 
deemed a fard kifayah, in order to safeguard and protect the hearts 
of the common folk against the snares of the innovators. This has 
come to pass only because of the rise of innovations, just as it became 
necessary to hire an escort along the pilgrimage route when bedouin 
excesses and brigandage raised their heads. Had bedouin aggression 
ceased, the hiring of guards would not have been necessary for the 
pilgrimage route. Similarly, had the innovator stopped his nonsense, 
the need for anything besides the familiar practice of the age of the 
Companions would not have been felt. Let, therefore, the theologian 
know the limits to the position in the realm of religion and let him 
know where he stands in relation to it, as does the guard in relation 
to the pilgrimage route. If the guard would apply himself exclusively 
to his watch, he would in no way be considered a pilgrim. Similarly, 
if he theologian would address himself exclusively to debate and 

1 . See supra, pp. 44-40. 


46 


47 



The Book of Knowledge 


contention and would not walk in the way of the hereafter nor would 
occupy himself in watching over and reforming the heart, he would 
not be numbered among the learned men of religion. The theologian, 
furthermore, has nothing of religion except the creed, which the 
common folk share with him and w'hich is among the outward 
practices of the heart and tongue. The theologian is not distinguished 
from the common folk except through the art of argumentations and 
safeguarding the law. 1 lowever, to know' God, His attributes, and His 
works as well as well what we referred to under the science of 
revelation 1 does not result from theology — in fact, theology is 
almost a veil and a barrier against it. Those are not attained except 
through self-mortification which God has made pre-requisite for 
guidance when He said, " And those who strive hard for Us, in Our 
way will We guide them: for God is assuredly with those who do 
righteous deeds." 2 

You may sav, “You have restricted the boundaries of the 
theologian's domain to the safeguarding of the creed of the common 
folk against the corruption of innovators just as the activities of the 
escort are confined to the protection of pilgrims' goods against 
bedouin loot, and those of the jurisprudent to the maintenance of law 
wherewith the magistrate restrains the evil-doers. But the protection 
of the pilgrims' goods and the maintenance of law, in comparison to 
the science of religion, hold inferior ranks, w'hile the learned men of 
Islam who are celebrated for their virtue and, in God’s sight, are the 
most excellent, are the jurisprudents and the theologians. How then 
do you hold them in such low rank in comparison to the science of 
religion?” To this 1 would reply, “Whoever would recognize the 
truth through men would be lost in the wilderness of confusion. 
Therefore know the truth and you would know' its devotees, especially 
if you yourself have been following in its path. If, however, you are 
satisfied with imitating and revering the accepted degrees of 
excellence among men, do not ignore the Companions or their high 
station, because those to whom I have alluded have agreed upon their 
superiority and that in the field of religion they' are neither equalled 

I . See supra, pp. 44-49. 2. Surah, XXIX: 69. 


The Book of Knowledge 


nor excelled. Their superiority, however, was achieved not through 
theology or jurisprudence, but through knowledge of the hereafter 
and following in its path. Thus Abu-Bakr 1 excelled men not by much 
fasting or prayer, not by prolific recitation of traditions or the stating 
of legal opinions, and certainly not by theology, but as the Prophet 
testified, by something which rested in his bosom. Let your desire lie 
in seeking that secret for it is the precious jewel and the hidden pearl. 
Avoid also what most people have approved, praised, and exalted for 
reasons the explanation of which is beyond our present scope.” The 
Prophet of God died leaving behind him thousands of Companions, 
all of whom knew God and were commended by the Prophet himself; 
none excepting some ten of them were versed in the science of 
theology or ever appointed themselves dispensers of legal opinions. 
One of these was ibn ‘Umar 2 who, whenever he was asked to give a 
legal opinion, used to reply, “Go to such and such a governor who 
has taken the affairs of the people upon himself and lay this 
responsibility upon his shoulders”; indicating thereby that the right 
to give an opinion on legal decisions and cases is an. adjunct of 
government and authority. 

When ‘Umar 3 died, ibn-Mas‘ud exclaimed, “Nine-tenths of 
all knowledge have vanished.” He was then told, “How do you say 
such a thing when we still have among us most of the Companions?” 
To which he replied, “I did not mean the science of legal opinions and 
decisions; rather I mean the science of knowing God.” Would you 
then think that he meant the science of thee' agy and polemics? And 
why do you not strive to obtain that knowledge of which nine-tenths 
have vanished with the death of ‘ Umar? Itwasalso ‘Umarwhoclosed 
the door of theological and polemic speculation and lashed Sabigh 
with a whip when the latter confronted ‘Umar with a question 
concerning two contradictory verses in the Book of God, banished 
him therefore from his company, and ordered the people to do die 
same. 

1 . The first caliph. 

2. ‘Abdullah, son of the second caliph (A.H. 73/A.D. 692-3); see ibn-Sa'd, 

Vol. IV Pt. I, pp. 105-38. 

3. The second caliph. 


48 


5 


49 


The Book of Knowledge 


As to your saying that among the learned men, those who are 
well known are the jurisprudents and theologians, you should know 
that what secures excellence before God is something and what 
achieves fame among men is another. Thus Abu-Bakr’s feme was 
because of the caliphate while his excellence was because qf the 
secret which rested in his bosom! Similarly, ‘Umar’s fame rested on 
his political acumen while his excellence was the result of the science 
of knowing God, nine-tenths of which science vanished with his 
d ea th, as well as the result of his efforts to come closer to God in the 
transaction of the affairs of his government and in his justice and 
mercy in dealing with his subjects. This is a thing hidden in his heart; 
nevertheless it is not impossibleto imagine that the rest ofhis outward 
deeds could have been motivated by his desire for power, prestige, 
and reputation, as well as his ambition for feme. Fame, therefore, is 
the result of things destructive and excellence the result of things 
secret, known to no one else. 

Consequently, the jurisprudents and the theologians, like the 
rali phg the judges, and the learned men, differ. Some of them (for 
example) have sought God through their knowledge, legal opinions, 
and tK rmig h their protection of the usage of the Prophet of God, and 
courted thereby neither false appearance nor public attention. Those 
are they who merit the approval of God and who obtain excellence 
in His sight because they act according to their knowledge and 
because they seek His fece through their legal opinions and 
s pfttjVjnmt ; for every knowledge is work, an acquired activity, but 
not every work is knowledge . 1 2 

The physician can come closer to God through his knowledge 
and would be rewarded for it because he labours for God. The 

1. B-Dubay‘; ibn-Isl*; see Yaqut, Mu 'jam al-Buldan, ed. F. Wustenfeld 
(Lapsing, 1866-70), Vol. El, p. 677. 

2. Al-Ghazz&li seems to mean by this passage that every act of learning is 
work, i.e. an action whereby something not inherent is acquired, the 
contrary of which is that by every work that one does, one does not 
necessarily acquire knowledge. The two phrases however allow for a 
multitude of interpretations of which this is only one strong possibility. 


The Book of Knowledge 


magistrate, too, mediates between his subjects for the sake of God 
and would therefore meet His approval and be rewarded, not because 
he holds people answerable according to the science of religion, but 
because he is entrusted with a work intended to draw men closer to 
God. 

That with which men draw closer to God is divided into three 
parts; pure knowledge which is the science of revelation; pure works 
such as, for example, the justice of the magistrate and his rule among 
men; and a mixture of works and knowledge which is the science of 
the path of the hereafter whose possessor belongs to both the men of 
knowledge and the men of works. Examine yourself, therefore, and 
see, whether you will on the day of resurrection be in the company of 
the learned men of God, or in that of the labourers of God, or in both 
investing with each of the two. This is more important to you than 
imitation for the sole purpose of being popular. Thus it was said: 

‘“Take thou the cash and let the credit go,’ 

Thou hast no need of Saturn when the sun doth rise.” 

We shall, however, relate to you from the lives of the early 
jurisprudents things which will show you that those who have 
professed to be their followers have in reality done them injustice and 
are their most virulent enemies on the day of judgment. Those (early 
jurisprudents) sought nothing with their knowledge except the fece 
of God. Several things in their lives were seen as belonging to the 
signs of the learned men of the hereafter — this we shall clarify under 
the section which deals with those signs. These men did not devote 
themselves exclusively to the science of jurisprudence but were 
employed in the science of the hearts and the observation thereof. 

They were kept form teaching and composing by the thing 
which had kept the Companions from the same persuits in the field 
of jurisprudence, despite the feet that the latter were jurisprudents 
devoted to the giving of legal opinions . The reasons which kept them 
from teaching and composing and the causes which barred than from 
these pursuits are evident and require no mention. Nevertheless, we 


50 


51 


The Book of Knowledge 


shall, in this connection, recount a few things from their lives to show 
that what we have already related is in no way disparaging to them 
but to those who have feigned to be following their example and their 
school of thought while, in feet, they were opposed to them in their 
works and lives. 

The jurisprudents who are the spokesmen of the science of 
jurisprudence and the leaders of men, namely those whose school 
claims the greatest following, are five: al-Shafi‘i, Malik, abu- 
Hanifah, Ahmad ibn-Hanbal, and Sufyan al-Thawri, each of whom 
has been a worshipper of God, an ascetic, a learned man versed in the 
science of the hereafter, a jurisprudent well-informed in the affairs of 
men in this world, and a devotee to the knowledge of God’s face. All 
of these five characteristics, with the exception of the fourth, the 
pursuit and thorough research into the details of jurisprudence, have 
beat cultivated by the jurisprudents of the different schools, because 
the other four characteristics are of no use except for the hereafter, 
w hite this particular one is useful for die affairs of this world and the 
next. Its value for this world, however, diminishes when the 
hereafter becomes its avowed end. The modem jurisprudents have 
taken it up and consequently have claimed to be like the early imams . 
But how far from the truth this is, since angels are not usually 
compared with blacksmiths. 

Since the early imams' knowledge of jurisprudence is evident, 
let us relate some aspects of their lives which will reflect the other 
four char acteristics That al-Shafi‘i was a devout worshipper of God 
is shown by what has been related concerning him, namely that he 
used to divide his night into three parts: one-third for study, one-third 
for prayer, and one-third for sleep. Al-RabiY said that it was the 
custom ofal-Shafi‘ i during prayer time in the month of Ramadan to 
read the Qur’an from cover to cover sixty- times. Al-Buwayti, 1 2 
another friend of al-Shafi’i, reported that al-Shafi‘i used to go 

1. Abu-Muhammad (al-Rabi’i ibn-Sulayman al-Muradi, A.H. 270/A.D. 

834), the companions ofal-Shafi‘i. See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, pp. 326-7. 

2. Abu-Ya*qub, Yusuf ibn-Yahya(A.H. 231/A.D. 846); see ibn-Khallikan, 

Vol. ID, pp. 415-17. 

52 


The Book of Knowledge 


through the Qur’an once a day throughout Ramadan. Al-Husayanal- 
Karabisi 1 related saying, “I spend the night with al-Shafi‘i a number 
of times. Invariably he used to spend about a third of the night in 
prayer, yet I have not seen him go beyond the recitation of fifty verses 
and at most, a hundred. At the end of each verse he would beseech 
God’s mercy upon himself and upon all the Muslims and the 
believers, and at each verse describing or predicting torture he would 
call upon God for refuge, begging salvation for himself and for the 
believers.” This indicates that in his heart were combined both 
hope and fear, and limiting himself to the recitation of fifty verses 
reveals his profound knowledge and insight into the secrets of the 
Qur’an. 

Furthermore, al-Shafi‘i himself said, “Never have I been 
satisfied in sixteen years, because a full stomach fattens the body, 
hardens the heart, dulls the intellect, fosters sleep, and renders man 
lazy in worship.” See, then, his wisdom in enumerating the evil of a 
foil stomach and how he had deprived himself of its luxury in favour 
of diligence in worship; truly to cut down on food is the beginning of 
religion. Al-Shafi‘i also said, “Never have I sworn by God, either 
truthfully or falsely.” Consider, therefore, his reverence and 
veneration of God and how they indicate that he is aware of the 
majesty of God. He was once asked a question but would not reply. 
On being then asked, “Why dost thou not answer?” he said, “not 
until I determine which is better, my silence or my reply. ” Notice how 
he watches his tongue, since it is die most unruly bodily member of 
jurisprudents and the most difficult to control and subdue. Through 
this incident is also revealed that al-Shafi‘i would neither speak nor 
remain silent unless his speech or silence promoted virtue and 
merited heavenly reward. 

Ahmad ibn-Yahya ibn-al-Wazir 2 related that, one day, he 


1 . Al-Husayn ibn-Ali ibn-Yazid abu-‘Al al-Karabisi (A.H. 248/A.D. 862), a 
disciple ofal-Shafi'i; see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, p. 258, &1-Subki, Vol. I, 
pp. 251-6. 

2. Ibn-Sulayman ibn-Muhajir al-Tujibi (A.H. 25 1 /A.D. 865); see al-Subki, 
Vol. I, p. 223. 

53 




The Book of Knowledge 


followed al-Shafi‘i, as the latter emerged from Suq al-Qanadil (the 
market place of the chandeliers) when they met a person swearing at 
a certain learned man. Whereupon ai-ShafTi turned to the group of 
men following him and said, “Shield your ears against hearing 
obscene speech as your shield your tongues against speaking it; 
verily the hearer is the accomplice of the speaker. The obscene man 
would select the filthiest thing in his vessel and would do his best to 
empty it into yours. But if his words were ignored, he who would 
ignore them would triumph just as the obscene man himself would be 
made miserable.” 

Al-ShafTi related that a certain wise man wrote to another 
saying “Thou hast been given knowledge; defile not, therefore, thy 
knowledge with the darkness of sin, lest thou be caught in the 
darkness when the people of learning march forward by the light of 
their knowledge.” 

With regard to his asceticism, al-Shafi‘i said: “Whoever 
should claim that he has in his heart the love of this world as well as 
the love of its Creator, the same has lied.” 

Al-Humaydi 1 related that one day al-Shafi‘i set out for al- 
Yaman in the company of some of the governors. With ten thousand 
dinars he made his way to Makkah where a tent was pitched for him 
just outside the city and the people came out to see him. He did not 
leave his tent until he had distributed all among his visitors. Once on 
leavingthe public bath he gave the bath-keeper agreat sum ofmoney. 
On another occasion his whip dropped from his hand and a certain 
man picked it up and gave it back to him; whereupon he rewarded the 
man with fifty dinars. The generosity- of al-Shafi‘i, however, is too 
well known to be described, and the beginning of asceticism is 
generosity because whatever a person loves, he keeps and does not 
part with it. Thus no one would part with his wealth except him who 
has no regard for this world as this is what asceticism really means. 

1 ’ Abu-Bakr ‘Abdullah ibn-al-Zubayr al-Qurashi al-Asadi (A.H. 2 1 9/A D. 

834); see Tadhkiral al-Huffaz. Vol. II, pp. 2*3; al-Subki, Vol. I, 

pp. 263-4. 


The Book of Knowledge 


Furthermore, the strength of al-Shafi‘i asceticism, the intensity ofhis 
fear of God, and the concentration ofhis efforts on the hereafter are 
manifest from a report that Sufyan ibn-Uyaynah 1 once related a 
tradition on mystical sciences ( al-raqa ‘iq) 2 in the presence of al- 
Shafri, whereupon the imam fainted and those present thought that 
he had died. Sufy an thereupon said, “If he should die, the, most 
excellent man of the age would have passed away .” 

The same thing is also manifest in another report from the lips 
of ‘Abdullah ibn-Muhammad al-Balawi 3 who said, “Umar ibn- 
Nubatah 4 and I were once sitting discussing the pious men and 
ascetics when ‘ Umar said, ‘Never have I seen a more godly or a more 
eloquent person than Muhammad ibn-Idris al-Shafi i. Once upon a 
time he and I went out with al-Harith Ibn-Labid 5 to al Safa, 6 (al- 
Harith was a disciple ofal-Salih al-Murri 7 and had a beautiful voice), 
where al-Harith began to recite from the Qur’an. As he was repeating 
the verse, ‘On that day they shall not speak, nor shall it be permitted 
them to allege, excuses,’ 8 I saw al-Shafi‘i’s colour change and his 
whole body tremble; in fact, he was so intensely agitated that he fell 
into a swoon. On coming to consciousness, he started to repeat, ‘I 
seek refuge in God against the den of liars and the scoffing of the 
thoughtless! O Lord, to Thee the hearts of the gnostics (‘arifiri) have 
submitted themselves and before Thy throne the heads of those who 
yearn for Thee are bowed low! 0 Lord, bestow Thy bounty upon me 
and crown me with Thy intelligence. Through the grace of Thy 
countenance, forgive my shortcomings, “Thereupon he walked 
away and we departed.” On entering Baghdad (he was then in al- 
Traq), as I stopped on the river bank to perform my ablutions 

1 . A.H. 198/A.D. 814; see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. 1, pp. 375-6. 

2 . See fa 'rifat, p. 11 7. Cf. al-Bukhari, al-Riqaq, al-Darimi, al-Raqa‘ iq. 

3. Cf. al-Fihrist, p. 193. 

4. Unidentified. 

5 Pertiaps al-Nafri; see ibn-‘ Asakir,a/-fa rikh al-Kabir , Vol. ID (Damascus, 

1331), p. 456. 

6. Unidentified but evidently a place outside Baghdad 
7 A.H. 1 72/A.D. 788-9; see al-Fihrist, p. 1 83; ibn-Saad, Vol. VD, Pt. 2, p. 

39. 

8. Surah LXXVI1; 3^-6. 


54 


55 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


preparatory to prayer, a man passed by and turning to me said, 
“Young man, perform your ablutions well and God will treat you 
well in both this world and die next.” Looking up I saw the man go 
by while a crowd followed him. Thereupon I hurried through my 
ablutions and ran after than. He then turned around to me and asked 
“What seekest thou?” to which I replied, “Yes (my wish is) that thou 
shouldst teach me of what God hath taught thee.” He answered and 
said, “Know thou that whoever should believe in God would be 
saved, whoever should be faithful to His religion would be delivered 
from destruction and whoever should forsake the world would be 
compensated by God in the hereafter. Wouldst thou that I impart 
more unto thee?” On being answered in the affirmative, he added, 
“He who doeth three things, namely, to enjoin doing good and himself 
doeth accordingly, to forbid doing evil and himself doth abstain 
therefrom and to observe the restrictive ordinances of Cod, the same 
shall fulfil the faith. Wouldst thou that I should impart more unto 
thee?” “Yes” was my reply, and he said, “Forsake this world and 
seek the next and be truthful unto God in all thy affairs and thou shall 
be surely saved.” As he departed I asked who he was and those 
present replied, “al-Shafi‘i.” 

See, therefore, how he had fainted and how he had preached, 
and see how his asceticism and extreme fear of God are thereby 
revealed. Such fear and asceticism, however, are the result of nothing 
but knowing God, and no one of His servants fear Him except the 
learned. Nevertheless, al-Shafi‘i acquired this fear and asceticism 
not through the mastery of the books on the Salam' and the ijarah 2 
in the hadith or through grasping the other books of jurisprudence, 
but through the sciences of the hereafter which are derived from the 
Qur’an and the tradition wherein ancient and modem wisdom lie. 

That al-Shafi‘i was familiar with the secrets of the hearts and 
learned in the sciences of the hereafter would be made known to you 
through the wise sayings ascribed to him. It has been reported that 
once he was asked about hypocrisy, whereupon he answered 

1. See supra, p. 45. 2. See supra, p. 45. 


offhand. “Hypocrisy is a golden apple which passion has placed 
before the eyes of the learned who, through the poor judgment of their 
impulsive hearts, cast covetous eyes upon it, and thereby their works 
were frustrated.” He also said, “Shouldst thou fear for thy work 
from vanity then stop and find out whose favour thou dost seek and 
whose reward thou dost desire, what punishment thou dost fear, for 
what good fortune thou art grateful and what misfortune thou dost 
recall! If thou shouldst think on each of these, thy work would cease 
to seem great in thine eyes.” See, then, howal-Shafi‘i had determined 
the nature of hypocrisy and set forth a cure for vanity. Both these 
things, hypocrisy and vanity, are among the great maladies which 
afflict the heart. 

Al-Shafi ‘i also said, “Whoever doth not keep himself unspotted 
from the world, his knowledge availeth him nothing.” And again, 
“Whoever doth, through his know ledge, obey God, his heart becometh 
illumined. ” He also said, “Every one hath some who love him and 
some who hate him. If it be so, be among those who obey God.” 

It has been reported that ‘Abd-al-Qahir ibn-"Abd-al-‘ Aziz 1 
was a righteous and pious man and that he used to query al-Shafi'i 
about points of piety, and because of the man’s own piety', aI-Shafi‘i 
used to receive him kindly. One day he asked the imam saying, “Of 
these three, patience, trial ( mihnah ), and steadfastness ( tamkin ), 
w'hich is the most excellent?” Al-Shafi ‘i replied, “Steadfastness is 
the grade attained by the prophets and there is no steadfastness except 
after trial. When a prophet is tried and endures, he manifests the 
quality of patience; and when he manifests the quality' of patience he 
proves his steadfastness. Hast thou not seen how God hath tried 
Abraham and then established him in steadfastness, and hath done 
the same with Moses, Job, and Solomon to whom He also hath given 
a position of dominion and power. Steadfastness is the most excellent 
grade. Thus God hath said, “Thus did We establish Jospeh in the 
land. ’* Similarly, Job, after his great trial, hath been made steadfast, 
in which connection God hath said, ‘And We gave him back his 

1. Unidentified. 

2. Surah XII: 21 (in part); cf. Gen, XLI: 39. 


56 


57 




The Book of Knowledge 


family”.' These words of al-Shafi‘i reveal his profound knowledge 
of the secrets of the Qur’an and familiarity with the stations of the 
prophets and saints who are on their way to God, all of which belongs 
to the sciences of the hereafter. 

Al-Shafi‘i was once asked, “When will the man become 
learned?” He replied, “When he concentrates on one science until he 
masters it and at the same time addresses himself to the other sciences 
and surveys what he does not know; then he would become learned.” 
Galen was cnce reminded that it was his custom to prescribe several 
compounds for a single disease, to which he replied that the desired 
result of all is one and that he had mixed the simples to dilute their 
strength because w'hen administered unmixed they are fatal. These 
and innumerable like instances indicate the high position which al- 
Shafi‘i had attained in knowing God and in the sciences of the 
hereafter. 

That through jurisprudence in particular, and debates centring 
around the same subject in general, al-Shafi‘i had sought nothing but 
the face of God is revealed by the following, which it has been 
reported that he said: “I had hoped that men would benefit by this 
science and that none of the benefits would be attributed to me 
See, therefore, how he had realized what a curse it was to seek 
knowledge in order to obtain prestige and how he had been completely 
above such considerations, having had no other motive than the face 
of God. Said he again, “Never have I debated with anyone and 
wished that he would fall into error, nor ever talked to any person and 
did not desire that he would be divinely favoured, guided and helped, 
and that he would enjoy the care and keeping of God. Never have 1 
spoken to anybody and paid the slightest attention to whether God 
would reveal the truth through my words or through his, nor ever met 
any person to whom 1 had related the truth and the proof thereof and 
he had accepted it, without respecting him and believing in his 
sincerity; on the other hand, no one has ever disputed the truth before 
me and accepted not its proof, without falling from the place which 

I Surah XXI; 84 (in part). 


The Book of Knowledge 


he had held in my regard and without my rejecting him.” These signs 
indicate what the will of God is regarding jurisprudence and debate. 
See, however, how people have emulated al-Shafi‘i in only one of 
those five characteristics and how even in this particular one, they 
have not followed his example fully. For the reason abu-Thawr 1 
declared, “Neither I nor anyone else have ever seen the like of al- 
Shafi‘i .” Ahmad ibn-Hanbal said, “I have not offered a single prayer 
in forty years without mentioning al-Shafi‘i therein.” See therefore 
the fairness and justice of the suppliant and the high standing of him 
for whom the prayer is offered. Contrast also with this the rival 
learned men at the present time and what exists among them of 
hostility and hatred, and you would know the extent of the failure that 
results in following the example of those men. It is also reported that 
because of the repeated prayers of Ahmad ibn-Hanbal for al-Shafi‘i, 
the former’s son 2 asked his father saying. “What sort of a man was 
al-Shafi‘ i that you should pray for him so often?” Thereupon Ahmad 
replied, “O my son, al-Shafi'i was like the sun to the world and like 
health to men; think, then is there anything that could replace either 
of these two things?” He also used to say, “There is not a single man 
who has touched a pen with his hand that has not been indebted to al- 
Shafi’i.” 

Yahva ibn-Sa‘id al-Qattan 3 said, “I have not offered a single 
prayer in forty 4 years without mentioning al-Shafi‘i therein because 
of what God has given him of knowledge and the right w'ay into which 
the Almighty' has directed him.” 

We shall, however, be satisfied with this portion of al-Shafi‘i 
life because it is really beyond description. We have copied most of 


1 . Ibrahim ibn-Khalid ibn-abi-al-Yaman al-Kalbi al-Baghdadi (A H. 246/ 
A.D 860); see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, p. 5. 

2. Either Salih (A H. 226/A.D. 880), or ‘Abdullah (A.H. 290/A.D. 903); see 
ibn-Khallikan, Vol I. p. 20 

3. A.H 198/A.D. 813 See ibn-Sa‘d, Vol. VD Pt. 2, p 47 
a. Four in B margin, cf Tahdhib-Asma' , p. 75, 1.19. 


58 


59 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


these virtues from the book 1 on the virtues of al-Shafi‘t, which al- 
Shaykh Nasr ibn-Ibrahim al-Maqdisi 2 composed. 

As to Imam Malik, he, too, was adorned with those five 
characteristics. It is reported that he was once asked, “0 Malik, what 
sayest thou of seeking knowledge?” He replied, “It is fair and 
beautiful, but find what thou needest from the time thou openest thine 
eyes in the morning to the time thou closet them in the evening and 
confine thou thyself to it.” He was so emphatic in exalting the science 
of religion that whenever he sat down to discourse on tradition, he 
would first perform his ablutions, sit on his bed, comb his beard, 
perfume himself, settle down with stateliness and dignity, and then 
proceed with his discourse. When asked about it, he answered, “I like 
to exalt the traditions of the Apostle of God.” He also said, 
“Knowledge is a light which God places where He wishes; it does not 
depend on prolific relation of hadith.” This reverence and veneration 
of the science of religion reveals his firm and profound knowledge of 
the majesty of God. 

That through knowledge Malik sought only the face of God is 
evidenced by his words, “Arguing about religion is worth nothing,” 
as well as by the words of al-Shafi‘i who said, “I have seen Malik 
being queried about forty-eight problems, to thirty-two of which he 
replied, ‘I do not know.” On the other hand, he who seeks through his 
knowledge anything other than the face of God would not, because 
of his pride, admit that he does not know. For this reason al-Shafi‘i 
said that when the learned men are enumerated Malik would be the 
most outstanding, and that he was indebted to no one more than he 
was to Malik. 

It has been reported that abu-Ja‘far al-Mansur 3 enjoined 

1 . The title of the work is Manaqib al-Imam al-Shafi T; see Haji Khalfah, 
Kashf al-Zunun 'an Asami al-Kutub w-al-Fnun, ed. G. Flugel (Leipzig and 
London, 1835-58), Vol. VI, pp. 150-51. 

2. A.H. 490/A.D. 1 096. When al-Ghazzali went to Damascus, he attached 
himself to al-Maqdisi; see Tahdhib al-Asma ’, pp. 591-3; al-Subki, Vol. 
IV, pp. 27-9. 

3. The second ‘Abbasid caliph. 


Malik not to relate any tradition on the subject of divorce pronounced 
under compulsion {talaq al-nukrah)' and then secretly instigated 
someone to question him on the same subject. In the hearing of a 
crowd of people Malik declared, “Divorce pronounced under 
compulsion is not binding.” 2 Thereupon al-Mansur had him beaten 
and flogged, but Malik would not desist from relating the hadith. 
Malik also said, “No man who was truthful in relating the hadith and 
told no lie did not lose his mental faculty or suffered because of old 
age any infirmity or dotage.” 

With regard to his asceticism, it is attested by the report that 
al-Mahdi, 3 the prince of the believers, had once asked Malik saying, 
“Hast thou any home of thine own?” Malik replied, “No! But listen 
and I shall relate to thee. 1 heard Rabi‘ah ibn-abi-‘Abd-al-Rahman 4 
say, ‘Man’s home is his ancestry’.” At another time al-Rashid asked 
him the same question, and on his answering, “No”, the caliph gave 
him three thousand dinars and said, “Go, buy with these a home.” 
Malik took the money but did not spend it. When later al-Rashid was 
preparing to return (to Baghdad) he said to Malik “You should come 
along with us because we have decided to make the people follow the 
Muwatta ' 5 as ‘Uthman 6 made them follow them Qur’an.” 7 Malik 
replied, “There is no way to make the people follow the Muwatta ' 
because after the death of the Apostle of God, his Companions were 
dispersed around different countries and in each place they related 
the traditions (which they knew), and consequently among the people 
of each individual country different hadiths prevailed. Furthermore, 
the Prophet said, ‘Non-conformity among my people is a gift of 


1. Cf. al-Bukhan, Talaq, 11-12; ibn-Xiajah, Talaq, 15 

2. Divorce pronounced under compulsion is held valid only by the Hanafiite, 
while the Shafi'ite, Malikite and Hanbalites do not regard it binding. 

3. The third ’Abbasid caliph. 

4. The teacher of Malik (AH. 136/A.D. 753-4); see ibn-Khallikan, Vol, 1, 
pp. 325-6. 

5. Malik’s corpus of tradition which has become as estemmed as any of the 
six canonical books of traditions’ . Printed several times but not critically. 

6. The third Orthodox caliph. 

7. It was Caliph ‘Uthman who gave the Muslim community an authorised 
text of the Qur’an and ordered all unauthorised copies to be destroyed. 


60 


61 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


mercy. It is also not possible togoaiongwithyou because the Apostle 

of God said, ‘ If they would only understand they would know that al- 
Madinah is best for them.’ 1 And again, ‘Al-Madinah does away with 
its corruption just as the furnace does away with the dross of the 
iron.’ 2 Therefore, here are your dinars just as you have given them 
to me; vou may take them and if you wish you may leave them. Does 
this mean that you require me to leave al-Madmah in return for what 
you have given me? Know that 1 prefer nothing to the City of the 
Apostle of God — not even the whole world.” 

Of such, then, was the asceticism of Malik, and when, as a 
result of the dissemination of his knowledge and the dispersion of his 
friends, great riches were salt to him from the four comers of the 
earth, he distributed all in charity; Malik’s generosity reveals his 
asceticism and his meagre love for the world. Asceticism, however, 
is not the lack of wealth but rather the lack of any desire for wealth 
in the human heart. Such an ascetic was Solomon, despite his royal 
glory. 

Malik’s asceticism is further attested by a report ascribed to 
al-Shafi‘i to the effect that he once said, “I have noticed a number of 
Khurasanian (it is also said Egyptian) mules on Malik’s door, better 
than which I have not seen . I therefore told Malik how good they were 
and he replied, “They are a persent from me to thee, 0 abu- 
‘ Abdullah.’ On telling him that he shouldkeep one ofthem as amount 
for himself, he said, ‘I’ll be ashamed before God to tread with the 
hoof of any beast of burden the soil wherein lies His Prophet’.” 
Behold therefore his generosity, how he gave away all at one time, 
and his veneration of the soil of al-Madinah. That through his 
knowledge he sought the face of God and that he despised this world 
is by the following report. He said, “Once upon a time as I 

entered upon Haninal-Rashid, the Caliph told me, ‘Oabu-‘ Abdullah! 

You should frequent our place so that our sons may leant from you 
the Muwatta .’ To which I replied, ‘May God exalt my Lord, the 
prince! You, my Lord, are he source ofthis knowledge. If you honour 

1 . Al-Bukhari, al-Hajj, 219; al-Muwatta’, al-Jami‘, 2. 

2. Al-Bukhari, al-Hajj, 224; al-hiuwatta' , al-Jami , 2. 

62 


it, it will be exalted, and if you dishonour it, it will be despised. 
Furthermore, knowledge is something you achieve, not something 
you receive. ’ Thereupon Harun al-Rashid said, Y ou are right , (and 
turning to his son added), ‘Go out to the mosque and join the audience 
with the people’.” 

As to abu-Hanifah, he too was a worshipper of God and an 
ascetic who knew God, had His fear in his heart, and sought through 
his knowledge God’s face. That he was a worshipper to God is 
evidenced by a report transmitted on the authority of ibn-Mubarak 
who said that two things were characteristic ofabu-Hamfah, manliness 
and much prayer. Hammad-bin-abi-Sulayman 1 reported that he was 
in the habit of spending the whole night in prayer. According to 
another report it was his custom to spend half the night in prayer until 
one day, as he was walking through a street, a certain person pointed 
to him and said to a companion, “This is he who spends the whole 
night in prayer.” From that day on, he spent the whole of the night 
in prayer and said, “I’ll be ashamed before my God to be described 
with something I do not possess in connection with my worship of 
Him.” 

As to his asceticism, it has been reported that al-Rabi‘ ibn- 
‘ Asim 2 once said, “I was sent by Yazid ibn-‘ Umar ibn-Hubayrah 3 to 
summon abu-Hanifah before him.” On his appearing, Y azid offered 
him the position of governor of the treasury, but abu-Hanifah 
declined the offer and consequently, Yazid had him scourged with 
twenty 4 lashes. See then how he had run away from the office of 
governor of the treasury and bore the torture instead. 

Al-Hakam ibn-Hisham al-Thaqafi 5 said that he had once, 
while in Damascus, related a tradition to the effect that abu-Hanifah 
was one of the most honest men and that the governor had wanted him 
to take charge of the keys of the treasury or be scourged if he refused, 

1 . A H. 1 20/A.D. 738; see ibn-Qutaybah, p. 240. 

2. Unidentified. 

3 . Governor of al-‘Iraq under the last Umayyad caliph. Killed at the order of 
al-Mansur in A.H. 1 32/A.D. 750. See ibn-Khallikan. Vol. IH pp. 287-93. 

4. Cf ibn-Khallikan, Vol. m, p. 75, 1, 24. 

5. Was a close friend of abu-Hanifah. Seeibn-’Asakir, Vol. IV, (Damascus, 
1332), pp 412-13. 

63 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 




but abu Hanifah would have nothing of that, preferring torture at the 
hands of the governor, to torture at the hands of God. 

It was also reported on the authority of Muhammad ibn- 
ShujaV on the authority of one of his companions, that abu-Hanifah 
was once told, “The prince of believers, abu-Ja‘far al-Mansur, has 
ordered that the sum of ten thousand dirhams be paid to you.” Abu- 
Hanifah, however, would not consent to it and, on the day on which 
the sum was expected to be delivered, he performed the morning 
prayer, wrapped himself with his cloak and sat in silence. Presently 
the messenger of al-Hasan ibn-Qahtabah 2 arrived with the money 
and appeared before abu-Hanifah, but the latter would not speak to 
him. Then some of those present explained to al-Hasan that it was 
abu-Hanifah’s custom to act like that. Thereupon al-Hasan ordered 
that the bag containing the money be placed in one of the comers of 
the house, and left. Abu Hanifah then willed the contents of his house 
and told his son that, upon his death, his son should take the bag 
which contained the money to al-Hasan ibn-Qahtabah and tell him to 
take back his money which he had deposited with abu-Hanifah. 
When his son delivered the money to al-Hasan, the latter exclaimed, 
“May the mercy of God be upon thy father. Verily he hath been 
zealous over his religion.” 

It was also related that abu-Hanifah had also been invited to 
fill the position of chief judge but he declined saying, “I am not 
qualified for this post.” Asked why he thought so, he replied, “If I 
were to be honest about it I would know and say that I am not 
qualified for the job; if on the other hand I were to lie, I might say that 
I was qualified; but a liar is not fit for the judgeship.” 

Abu-Hanifah’s knowledge of the things of the hereafter and 
his concern with the weighty matters of religion as well as knowing 
God are attested to by his deep fear of God and by his asceticism. In 

1 Al-Thalji (A H. 226/A.D. 879-80). See ibn-abi-al-Wafa 'al-Qurashi. al- 

Jtrwahiral-Mudiyah fi Tabaqat al-Hanafiyah (Hyderabad, 1332), Vol. D, 

pp. 60-61. 

2 An ‘Abbasid general (A.H. 181/A.D. 797). See Tabari, Vol. ID, p. 646; 

ibn-Khallikan, Vol. ID, p. 293. 


this connection ibn-Juravj 1 had said, “it was reported to me that this 
Kufian friend of yours, al-Nu‘man ibn-Thabit, fears God very 
much.” Sharik al-Nakha‘i 2 had said that abu-Hanifah spent long 
spells in silence and contemplation and conversed little with men. 
These are among the clearest signs of inward knowledge and the 
concern with the weighty' matters of religion, because whoever has 
been blessed with silence and asceticism would receive all knowledge 
as well. 

The virtues of abu-Hanifah are, however, too many to be 
numbered. Had he not been characterised by perseverance in self- 
mortification, and had he not dipped into the sea of contemplation? Had 
he not throughout a period of forty 3 years performed his morning prayer 
(having spent all the night in continual prayer) on the basis of the evening 
ablutions? Had he not, also, performed the pilgrimage fifty-five times 
and seen God in his sleep a hundred times? 

This is but a small part of the lives of these of three imams. As 
to Ahmad ibn-Hanbal and Sufvan al-Thawri, their followers are not 
as many as those of the other imams, and of the two, the followers of 
Sufvan are the less numerous. Nevertheless, of the five, Ahmad and 
Sufvan were the best known for piety and asceticism. Since this book, 
however, is full of the account of their works and words, there is no 
need to take up their lives in detail at this moment. For the present, 
examine the lives of these three imams and ask yourself whether these 
states, words, and works, through which they forsook the world and 
devoted themselves to God, were merely the result of the knowledge 
of the several branches of jurisprudence, such as contracts of the type 
of salam. hire rental, and lease; and the different forms of divorce, 
namely, zihar, ila, A and li ‘an; or the result of a higher and nobler 
knowledge. Scrutinize, too, those who claim to be following the 
example of these imams and find out for yourself whether their claim 
is true or false. 

1. ‘Abd-al-Malikibn-‘Abd-al-‘Aiiz(A.H. 150/A.D. 767); see ibn-Khallikan, 

Vol.l, pp. 512-13; Tahdhib al-Asma', p. 787. 

2. Abu-' Abdullah (A.H. 1 77/A.D. 794), see ibn-Khallika, Vol. I, pp. 402-3. 

3. See lahdib al-Asma ’, p 704, 103. 

4 A form of divorce in which a man vows not to have any intercourse with 

his wife for a period not less than four months. See Ta rifat, . p .42; $umh 

0, 226; a! -Bukhari, Talaq, 21; ibn-Klajah , Talaq, 24. 


64 



SECTION HI 

On what is popularly considered to be a part of the science 
of religion, but is (really) not, including a discussion of the 
circumstances under which some of the sciences would be 
blameworthy, and on the exposition of how the names of certain 
sciences, jurisprudence, the science of religion, theology, 
admonition, and philosophy, have been changed, as well as on 
showing how much of sacred knowledge is praiseworthy and how 
much is blameworthy. 

Why blameworthy knowledge is so regarded. You may say 
that knowledge is seeing things as they really are, which is one of the 
attributes of God. Now, then, could a thing be knowledge and at the 
sometime be blame worthy? Be advised then that knowledge is not 
held to be blameworthy in itself. It is only regarded as such in the eyes 
of men for' one of three reasons. 

First when it leads to any harm, whether the harm should befell 
its practiser or someone else besides, for which reason the science of 
magic and talismans is held blameworthy. This is right and in 
accordance with the Qur’an which so attests. It is also a means for 
separating husband and wife. The Apostle of God himself was the 
victim of magic which caused him to become sick until Gabriel made 
it known to him and exorcized the evil spirit from underneath a stone 
in the bottom of a well . 1 Magic is something obtained through the 
knowledge of the properties of the precious stones and mathematical 
calculations relative to the places and times of the rising of the stars. 
A skeleton resembling the person to be charmed is made out of these 

1. For this incident see ibn-Sa'd, Vol. H, Pt. 2, pp. 4-6; al-Bukhari; Tibb, 

47, 49, 50; ibn-Majah, Tibb, 45. 


67 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


precious stones, which is gazed into, to the accompaniment of 
constant repetition of words of unbelief and obscenity which are 
contrary to law, until a special time in the rising of the stars arrives. 
Through it the aid of the devils is secured with the result that, in 
accordance with the established order God has ordained, strange 
states befall the charmed person. In so far as knowing these things 
constitutes knowledge, it is not blameworthy. Nevertheless, it is of no 
use except for harming people. The instrument of evil is in itself evil, 
and it is for this reason that magic is regarded blameworthy. If a 
person should pursue one of the saints of God in order to kill him, but 
the saint should hide in a safe place and, then, the oppressor inquires 
about the saint’s whereabouts, it would not be permissible to point 
out his hiding place, bat rather, under the circumstances, lying would 
be incumbent. For while pointing out the whereabouts of the saint is, 
in itself, a true statement of the feet, nevertheless it is blameworthy 
because it breeds injury. 

Second, a knowledge is blameworthy when it is mostly (ft 
ghalib al-amr ) harmful as, for example, astronomy which is not, in 
itself, blameworthy, because it is oftwo parts: The first is mathematical 
in reference to which the Qur’an has pronounced that by it the courses 
of the sun and the moon are reckoned Thus God said, “And the sun 
and the moon (run their courses) according to a (certain) reckoning. 
And again, “And as for the mpon we decreed stations for it, till it 
r h a"g*« like an old and crooked palm branch.” 2 The second is 
astrology (ahkam) the gist of which is that future events are indicated 
by present causes. This is similar to how a physician is guided by the 
patient’s pulse to predict the future development of a disease. 
Astrology is therefore an attempt to know the course of the laws and 
ordinances of God relative to His creatures. But the law has declared 
it blameworthy. Thus the Prophet said, “Whenever the decrees of 
God are mentioned, withhold (from discussing them); whenever the 
stars are mentioned, desist (from any talk); and when my Companions 
are mentioned, refrain (from any gossip).” And again, “After my 

7 WUML ” 2. Surah XXXV: 39. 


death three things I fear for my people, the injustice of Imams, the 
belief in the star (astrology), and disbelief in the decrees of God.” 
Umar ibn-al-Khattab said, “Acquire of the science of the stars 
enough to lead you on land and on sea but no more.” He warned 
against it for three reasons: First, because it is harmful to most 
people, since if they were told that these results would ensue 
consequent upon the course of that stars, they might think that it is 
the stars which influence the course of events and are also the gods 
who direct the world. Furthermore, in view of the feet that the stars 
are glorious celestial bodies and awe-inspiring to the hearts, man’s 
heart would naturally become focussed upon them and would see 
both good and evil required or forbidden by the stars with the result 
that the name of God would be erased from the heart. The feeble- 
minded one does not look beyond the means, and only the learned man 
who is well-grounded in knowledge would understand that the sun, 
moon, and stars are subject to the will of God. Thus the parable of 
the feeble-minded person who thinks that the light of the sun is the 
result of its rising, is like the parable of an ant which as it happened 
upon the surface of a sheet of paper, was endowed with reason and 
thereupon watched the movement in the process of writing, only to 
think that it was the work of the pen, but would not go beyond that 
to see the fingers, and behind the fingers the hand, and behind the 
hand the will which moves it, and behind the will a deliberate arid an 
able scribe, and behind all, the Creator of the hand,and the ability, 
and the will. Most people do not look beyond the nearby and earthly 
causes and never arrive at the Cause of all causes. This, therefore, is 
one of the reasons why the science of the stars has been forbidden. 

A second reason is that astrology is purely guess work and in 
the opinion of the average man, the influence of the stars is not 
determined either with certainty or even with probability. 
Pronouncements in connection with it are the result of ignorance. 
Consequently, astrology has been pronounced blameworthy because 
of this ignorance, not because it is knowledge. Furthermore, this 
knowledge, it is said, was of a miraculous nature possessed by 


68 


69 



The Book of Knowledge 


Prophet Idris,' but has now vanished and is no more. The rare cases 
in which the astrologer happens to be correct are coincidences. He 
may happen upon some of the causes, but the effect will not result 
therefrom unless several other conditions, the comprehension of 
whose realities are beyond the reach ofhuman beings, should prevail. 
|£ however, God should grant to him the knowledge of the remaining 
causes, the astrologer’s prediction would come true; but if that is not 
granted to him, he would err and his prediction would be not unlike 
the guess of a man who is moved to say whenever he sees the clouds 
gathering and rising from the mountain tops, that there will be rain 
this day. Rain may actually fall though it is also possible that a hot 
sun should rise and disperse the clouds. The mere presence of clouds 
in the skies is not sufficient for bringing down rain; there are other 
conditions which cannot be determined. Similarly, the sailor s guess 
that the ship will have a safe sailing is based upon the usual behaviour 
of the winds with which he is familiar. But there are unknown factors 
which control the movements of the winds and which the sailor would 
never know. Consequently, he would sometimes guess correctly and 
sometimes he would err. For this reason, even the strong minded 
person has been forbidden to practise astrology. 

A third reason why man has been warned against the science 
of the stars is because it is of no use at all. The most which could be 
said on its behalf is that it is, at its best, an intrusion into useless things 
and a waste of time and life which is man’s most precious belonging. 
Such a thing is the most serious loss. 

Once upon a time, the Apostle of God passed by a man 
surrounded bv a crowd. On asking what the matter was, he was told 
that the man was learned authority “On what? the Prophet said, and 
was told, “On poetry and Arab genealogy .” Thereupon the Prophet 
said, “This is a science whose knowledge availeth not and the 
ignorance of which harmeth not.” And again, “Verily knowledge is 
an attested wonder, or an observed law, or a just ordinance. 

1 The Muslim equivalent to Enoch See Surahs XDC: 57, XXI: 58, cf Gen. 

4: 17; 5: 18-24; Heb 1 1:5. 

2 Cf ibn-Majah, Intro., 8: 3; abu-Dawud , al-Fara’id, 1 


70 


The Book of Knowledge 


Therefore meddling into astrology and the like is a hazardous 
underta king , both foolish and useless, because what has been 
ordained shall be, while the attempt to avoid it is impossible. On the 
contrary, in medicine, for which the need is great , most of the 
principles, unlike those of the interpretation (of dreams), can be 
determined and known; unlike interpretation, too, in spite of the feet 
that it may sometimes be guess work, there is no danger inherent in 
medicine. 

The third reason (for which a kind of knowledge may be 
pronounced blameworthy) is when the pursuit of that kind of 
knowledge does not give the practiser any real scientific advantage. 
Consequently, such knowledge is intrinsically blameworthy, as, for 
example, the study of the trivial sciences before the important ones, 
and the obscure before the significant, like delving into the divine 
mysteries which have been pursued by both the philosophers and the 
theologians; but neither they nor anyone else could grasp it in whole 
or in part except the prophets and the saints. For this reason people 
should be deterred from delving into these mysteries, and instead, be 
diverted to pursue those subjects which the law allows, wherein lies 
sufficiency for the guided. How many a person has delved into the 
sciences and reaped injury therefrom? Had he not meddled in them, 
his religious standing would have been fer better that its resultant 
condition. It is, thus, undeniable that knowledge is harmful to certain 
people just as bird meat and several kinds of excellent pastry are 
injurious to the suckling infant. Still more there are persons for whom 
ignorance is, in some cases, beneficial. It is thus related that a certain 
person had once complained to a physician about the sterility of his 
wife — that she bore him no children. The physician, thereupon, 
examined the wife’s pulse and told her that she needed no medicine 
forbearing children because her pulse indicated that she was destined 
to die within forty days . On hearing that, the woman became gravely 
frightened and perturbed and gave away all her possessions, having 
also written her will. Furthermore, because of worry she remained 
for those forty days without either food of drink. Nevertheless, she 
did not die, to which the physician replied, “I knew that all along! Go 


71 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


to her now and she will bear you children.” The husband said, “But 
how could that be?” The physician answered and said, “Seeing that 
your wife was fleshy and the fat gathered around the mouth of her 
vvomb, and knowing that she would not reduce except from fear of 
death, I frightened her until she became thin and the obstruction to 
bearing children has now gone. ” This, therefore, would show you the 
dangers of some of the branches of knowledge and would make clear 
to you the significance ofthe words of the Prophet when he said, “We 
seek refuge in God from useless knowledge .” 1 Do not, then, be a 
seeker after sciences which the law has pronounced blameworthy and 
against which it has warned. Rather be steadfast in emulating the 
example of the Companions and follow nothing but the usage of the 
Prophet; for safety lies in obedience whereas in adventure and 
aberration lies danger. Do not also boast much of your so-called 
opinion, reasonable judgement, proof and evidence, as well as the 
claim that you investigate into things in order to find out and 
determine their true nature and that there is no harm in the pursuit of 
knowledge. T ruly the harm that might befall you therefrom would be 
greater (than the benefits). Many are the things whose knowledge is 
harmful to you to the extent that it might ruin you in the hereafter 
unless God should intervene with His mercy. You should also know 
that just as the keen and skilful physician masters secret therapies 
which, to the lay mind, seen strange and improbable, so also do the 
Prophets who are the physians of the hearts and the experts on the 
principles which underlie life in die herafter — (in their field of 
religion they achieve a knowledge which no lay mind can grasp). 
Consequently, do not pass judgement on their ways according to 
what you deem reasonable or you would perish. Not infrequently a 
person may injure one of liis fingers and following his own mind 
would proceed to apply ointment to it until the skilful physician 
points out to him that he should treat it by applying the ointment to 
the opposite shoulder . 2 But the patient, not knowing how the sinews 
branch out into the body or where they spring from or how they go 
around the body, would deem it very unusual and improbable. The 
same is true of the hereafter and of the particulars of the statutes of 

1. Ibn-Majah, Intro , 23:1. 2. Breads: palm. 


the law, its rules and articles of faith which have been ordained for 
man to follow; all are imbued with mysteries and symbols which are 
beyond the capacity and the ability of the mind to perceive, just as the 
properties ofthe precious stones possess wonderful qualities which 
experts have failed to understand, so much so that no one has been 
able to determine the reason why the magnet attracts iron. Yet the 
wonderful and strange things in faith and works and their usefulness 
for the purity of the heart as well as its cleanliness, integrity, and 
rectitude in order to be lifted up to the neighbourhood of God, so that 
it might be exposed to the breeze of His bounty, are far more 
numerous and greater than anything in medicines and drugs. And as 
the mind fails to discern the things which are useful for life in the 
hereafter, especially since it is not possible to determine them through 
experimentation. These things would be subject to experimentation 
only if some ofthe dead would return and enlighten us as to what faith 
and works are acceptable and useful in the sight of God, and would 
bring man nearer to Him, and what faith and works would estrange 
the creature from his Maker. But alas, this is not possible and is not 
to be expected. You should be satisfied if your mind would guide you 
to the truth of the words of the Prophet and make plain to you the 
significance of his counsel. Put aside, therefore, the promoting of 
your mind from your conduct and persist in comformity, for nothing 
else would save you. For this reason the Prophet said, “Verily some 
forms of knowledge are ignorance and (eloquent) speech, 
incoherence.” Of course knowledge is never ignorance but may have 
the same harmful influence as ignorance. The Prophet also said, A 
little bit of divine guidance is better than a great deal of knowledge” 
Jesus also said, “Many are the trees, but not all are fruitful; plentiful 
are the fruit, but not all are edible; (likewise) many are the branches 
of knowledge, but not all are useful .” 1 

DETERMINING WHAT NAME OF SCIENCES 
HAVE BEEN CHANGED 

You should also know that the source of confusion of the 
blameworthy sciences with the sacred is the tampering with, and the 

1 . Not in the canonical gospels 


72 


73 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


changes in, the names of the praiseworthy sciences and the alterations 
introduced therein, in bad faith, so as to connote other than those 
which the righteous fathers and die first-century Muslims intended. 
Consequently, five terms, namely, jurisprudence (fiqh), the science 
of religion (al-'ilm), theology ( tawhid ), admonition (tadhkir), and 
philosophy ( hikmah ), all names of praiseworthy sciences, whose 
possessors have held the chief positions in the religious organisation, 
but which now have been altered so that they connote something 
blameworthy; yet people have become reluctant to condemn those 
who possess them because of the widespread practice of applying 
these names to all of them alike. 

The first term to be affected wasjurisprudence whose meaning 
has been tampered with not so much by alteration and change but by 
limitation. It has thus been limited to the knowledge of unusual legal 
cases, the mastery of the minute details of their origins, excessive 
disputation on them, and the retention of the different opinions which 
relate to them. The person who goes more deeply into these things 
than his colleagues and devotes more time to them than the rest is 
considered the most versatile in jurisprudence. But in the early period 
of Islam the term jurisprudence (fiqh) was applied to the science of 
the path of the hereafter and the knowledge of the subtle defects of 
the soul, the influences of which render works comipt, the thorough 
realization of the inferiority of this life, the urgent expectation ofbliss 
in the hereafter, and the domination of fear over the heart. This is, 
indicated by the words of God when He said, “ ... that they may 
instruct themselves in their religion, and may warn their people when 
they come back to them.” 1 Jurisprudence is therefore, that which 
brings about such a warning and such a fear rather than details of 
ordinary divorce or divorce through // ‘an, or manumission (‘ ataq ), 2 
salam contracts, and hire, rental, and lease (ijarah), which produce 
neither warning nor fear. On the contrary, to devote oneself exclusively 
to these things hardens the heart and removes from it all fear which 
is exactly what we now see in those who have so devoted themselves . 
God thus said, “Hearts have they with which they understand not,” 3 

1 . Surah IX: 123. Al-Ghazzali took this verse out of its context. 

2. Also ‘itq. 

3 Surah VO: 178. cf. 1 1 5: 4-8, 135: 15-18 


having had in mind the meaning of belief, not of legal opinions . Upon 
my life, the word fiqh (discernment), now used for jurisprudence, and 
the word fahm (understanding) are nothing but two names for the 
same thing. At the present time, however, they are used both in their 
earlier and also their modem significations. God said, “Indeed ye are 
a greater source of fear in their hearts than God! This is because they 
are a people void of any discernment.” 1 He thus attributed their little 
fear of God and their great terror of the power of man to their meagre 
discernment. Judge, then, for yourself whether this was the result of 
not learning the details of legal opinions or the outcome of the 
disappearance of those sciences we have already mentioned. Speaking 
to the envoys who called on him, the Prophet addressed them saying, 
“Learned, wise and discerning.” 

Sa‘id ibn-Ibrahim al-Zuhri 2 was once asked which of the 
people of al-Madinah he thought was the most discerning, and he 
replied, “He who fears God the most,” thus pointing out that the fruit 
of religious insight (fiqh) and piety is in fact the fruit of esoteric 
knowledge rather than that of legal opinions and decisions. 

The Prophet said, “Shall I tell you who is the profoundly 
discerning man?” They answered, “Yes.” Thereupon he said, “The 
profoundly discerning man is he who has not induced people to 
despair of the mercy of God; nor made them feel safe (rather than urge 
them to repent) during the period of respite which God, out of 
patience, gives unto man; nor made them lose hope in the spirit of 
God; nor discarded the Qur’an in favour of something else.” When 
Anas ibn-Malik 3 related the following words ofthe Prophet. “1 prefer 
sitting in the company of men who praise God from sunset until 
sunrise to the setting free of four slaves,” he turned to Yazid al- 
Raqahi 4 andZiyadal-Numayri 5 andsaid, “Our meetings of invocation 
(dhikr) were different from your present gatherings in which one of 


1. Surah LIV: 13. 

2. A.H. 201/A.D. 816-17; see ibn-Sa'd, Vol. VIL, pp. 2, 83; al-Khatib al- 
Baghdadi, Ta'rikh Baghdad, Vol. IX (Cairo, 1349), pp. 1234. 

3. A.H. 93/A.D. 71 1-12; see ibn Qutaybah, p. 157. 

4. Zayd in “C”; cf. ibn-Sa'd, Vol. VD, Pt. 2, p. 1 3; al-Sam‘ani, f. 256 b 

5. Al-Sam‘ani, f. 569 b. 


74 


75 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


you delivers his sermons before his friends and recites traditions . We 
used to sit and ponder over the articles of faith, study the meaning of 
the Qur’an, enlighten ourselves in matters of religion and enumerate 
the blessings of God upon us.” Hence the process of studying the 
meaning of the Qur’an and of enumerating the blessings of God was 
called enlightenment. Said the Prophet, “The servant will not attain 
perfect religious insight until he should hate men in the essence of 
God and see in the Qur’an several meanings .” 1 This same tradition 
has been related as a mawquf tradition (tradition whose ‘sanad goes 
back to the Companions, but stops short of the Prophet) going back 
to abu-al-Darda’ who is supposed to have added, “(the servant) 
would then turn to himself and would hate himself more.” Asked 
once by Farqad al-Sabakhi 2 about something, al-Hasan expounded 
his view but the former retorted. “The jurisprudence disagree with 
you.” Thereupon al-Hasan exclaimed, “May thy mother be bereft of 
thee! Hast thou ever seen with thine own eyes a (real) jurisprudent? 
Verily the (real) jurisprudent is he who forsaketh the world and 
seeketh the hereafter, who understandeth the import of his religion, 
persisted) in the worship of his Lord, is pious, restraineth himself 
from attacks on the reputation of his fellow Muslims, abstained) from 
(reaching his hand to) their riches, and giveth them advice.” In all of 
this, he did not say, “who knoweth all legal opinions”. Nevertheless, 

I do not say that the term jurisprudence (flqh) did not include legal 
opinion in civil cases as well. This, however, was either in a general 
and broad manner or by way of regarding the one a subdivision of the 
other. But its application to the science of the hereafter was more 
common. Consequendy, this restriction brought forth some ambiguity 
which caused men to devote themselves solely to it to the neglect of 
the science of the hereafter and the nature of the heart. Furthermore, 
in their own human nature, men found encouragement, since esoteric 
knowledge is abstruse, to live by it is difficult, and to attain through 
it candidacy for office, whether executive or judiciary, or a position 
of prestige and wealth, is not possible. For this reason, by means of 

1 . This is a literal translation, the meaning of which may be: “he should hate 
men (because of his absorption) in the essence of God.” 

2. A H. 131/A.D. 748-9; see ibn-Sa'd , Vol. VD Pt. 2, p. 1 1. 

76 


restricting the signification of the term jurisprudence, which 
according to the law is a praiseworthy term, Satan found the 
opportunity to make the neglect of the science of the hereafter and 
the alteration in the connotation of its name attractive to the human 
heart. 

The second term to have been altered is the science of religion 
(al- 'ilm) which used to be applied to the knowledge of God, His 
miracles, and His works among His servants and creatures. When, 
therefore, (the Caliph) ‘Umar died, ibn-Mas‘ud exclaimed, “Verily 
nine-tenths of the science of religion (al- ‘ilm) has passed away.” He 
thus designated this knowledge as the science, using the definite 
article, and then explained it as the knowledge of God. Yet people 
used the term freely and altered its meaning by restriction until it 
became more commonly applied to those who debate cases of 
jurisprudence and the like with adversaries and are dubbed learned 
in the truth, versatile in knowledge, while those who do not practice 
that nor take it up are numbered among the weak, and are not 
considered to belong to the company of the learned. This also is 
alteration by restriction . But most of what has been said regarding the 
excellence of learning and the learned relates to the learned in God, 
His ordinances, His works, and His attributes. Nevertheless, it has 
now become customary to apply the word learned to those who do 
not comprehend of the science of the law except controversial 
syllogisms on disputed cases. Those versed in such gymnastics, in 
spite of their ignorance of the sciences of interpretation, tradition and 
religion, are now numbered among the versatile learned men. This, 
as a result, has proved detrimental to a great number of those who 
seek knowledge. 

The third term (to suffer alteration) was theology ( tawhid ) 
which has now become equivalent to scholastic theology (sina ‘at al- 
kalam), the knowledge of the methods of argumentation, the manner 
of confounding adversaries, and the ability to be diffuse in speech by 
means of asking too many questions, raising doubts, and formulating 
requisites, to an extent that some of those groups have gone so far as 
to call themselves 'The People of Equity and Unity’ (ahl al-adl w-al 


77 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


tawhid )' while the scholastic theologians were called the learned men 
of religion although nothing of he tenets of their profession was 
known during the early period of Islam. On die contrary the learned 
men at that time condemned very strongly anyone who would take to 
disputation and contention. 

As to the evident proofs which the mind accepts immediately 
on hearing and which are contained in the Qur’an, they have been 
known to all. Knowledge of the Qur’an was all knowledge while 
theology (i tawhid) signified something else which was beyond the 
comprehension of most scholastic theologians, and which, when they 
comprehended it, they were not called after its name. Theology was 
then the belief that all things come from God, a belief which ruled out 
all intermediary causes (al-asbab w-al-wasa ’il). Both good and evil 
would then be seen as coming completely from God. Such a thing is 
a noble station one of whose fruits is dependence, which will be 
described in the Book on Dependence. Of its fruits, too, are to 
discontinue blaming people and being angry with them, contentment, 
and resignation to the will of God. One of its fruits, also, has been 
illustrated by the words of abu-Bakr who when asked during his 
sickness, “Shall we call you a physician?” said, “(It was) the 
physician (who) made me sick.” According to another report when 
he fell sick he was asked, “What has the physician told you about 
your sickness?” To which he replied. “He hath told me, ‘Verily I 
doeth what 1 chooseth.’” 2 Examples of this will also appear in the 
book on Dependence and the book on the Unity of God. 

Theology (tawhid) is, therefore, like a precious fruit which is 
enca se d in two successive husks. Obviously the outer husk is farther 
from die pith than the inner husk. People have thus applied the term 
[theology] exclusively to the husk which encases the pith, as well as 
to their protection, and have entirely ignored the pith itself. The outer 
husk represents the verbal profession that there is no god but Allah, 
which profession is called monotheism in contra-distinction to the 

1. These were the Mu' tazilites. See al-Shaharastani , al-Milal w-al — Nihal, 

ed., william Cureton (London, 1846), pp. 29-31. 

2. Cf. Surahs XI: 109; LXXXV: 16; Hikyat al-Awliya\ Vol. I, p. 34. 


trinitarianism the Christians profess. Such a profession, however, 
may come from the lips ofhypocrite whose secret thoughts contradict 
his open declaration. The inner husk represents the state wherein the 
heart neither opposes nor denies to express meaning of this statement, 
but rather the outward expression of the heart represents its belief 
and the acceptance of that belief. This is the monotheism 
which the common folk profess. As already mentioned, the 
theologians are the guardians of these husks against the corruption 
of innovators. 

The third part is the pith itself. It represents the belief that all 
things come from God, a belief which rules out any consideration of 
instrumentalities and implies worshipping Him and no other thing 
besides Him. Those who follow their own passions do not conform 
to this monotheism, because anyone who follows his own passions 
makes them the object of his worship. Thus God said, “Hast thou 
seen him who hath made a god of his passions.” 1 The Prophet also 
said, “Of all the gods who have been worshipped on earth Allah 
hateth the passions most . ” Actually, anyone who would think, would 
find out that the idol worshipper worships not the idol but his own 
passions because his soul is inclined after the religion of his fathers 
and he follows that inclination. The inclination ofthe soul towards the 
things familiar to it is one of the meanings expressed by the word 
passions. Outside the pale of this monotheism are also dislike for 
people and not paying attention to them, because how is it possible 
for the person who believes that all things come from God to dislike 
his fellowmen? Theology stood for this station, the station of the 
saints. But see to what it has been altered and with what of its husks 
people have been content? See howthey have sought refuge inmutual 
praise and boasting of those things whose names have a praiseworthy 
reputation while in the meaning and signification for which these 
names stand, and for which the real praise is due, they have been 
utterly bankrupt. Their bankruptcy is like that of the man who, rising 
up in the morning, turns his face towards the Qiblah and says, “1 
have turned my face like a hanif unto the Creator ofthe heavens and 

L Surahs XXV: 45;XLV: 22. 


78 


79 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


the earth.” Yet unless his heart in particular has been duly turned 
unto God, his assertation would be the first daily lie which he 
commits against God. If he means by the word face its obvious 
meaning, the fact still remains that he has not turned it except towards 
the K‘abah and away from the other directions. But the K‘abah does 
not point towards the Creator of the heavens and the earth so that he 
who turns his face towards it turns it to God who is limited by neither 
directions nor climes. If, on the other hand, he means by it his heart, 
which is what it should be and which is the instrument of worship, 
how could his words be true when his heart is bent upon his worldly 
desires and needs, and absorbed in devising tricks wherewith tc 
amass wealth and prestige and to secure an abundance of worldly 
means towards which he is directing the attention of all his being? 
When, then, did he turn his face to the Creator of the heavens and the 
earth? The following sums up all the truth of monotheism: the 
monotheist is he who sees nothing but the One God and only turns his 
face to Him. This is in conformity with the words of God when He 
said, “Say: It is ‘ God ' ; then leave them in their pastime of cavillings .” 1 
What is intended here is not verbal profession, as the tongue is like 
an interpreter who tells the truth at one time and lies at another. God, 
however, regards not the interpreter [the tongue], but that for which 
the tongue is the interpreter, namely, the heart which is the source of 
religion and the place wherefrom it springs. 

The fourth term to be altered was the science of invocation 
(dhikr) and admonition ( tadhkir ). God said, “Yet warn them for, in 
truth warning will profit the believers .” 2 Several traditions 
commending the assemblies of invocation (dhikr) have been passed 
down to us, as for instance, by the words of the Prophet when he said, 
“When you pass by the gardens of Paradise, stop and enjoy 
yourselves.” On being asked what the gardens of Paradise were, he 
replied. “The assemblies of invocation.” And again in the following 
tradition, “Verily, other than guardian angels , 3 God hath rover 

1. Surah VI: 91. 2. Surah LI: 55. 

3 . The Muslims believe that two angels, who are changed even day, attend 

every person to observe and write down his action Cf Surahs L: 16: 
LXXXD: 10-11: al-Qazwini, Ajaibn al-Makhluqat wa-Ghara'ib a l - 
SlaMjudat , ed. F. Wustenfeld (Gottingen, 1940), p. 60. 

80 


(sayyahuri) angels’ who roam the earth looking for assemblies of 
invocation (dhikr ) . On locating an assembly they beckon one another 
saying, ‘Come unto your goals.’ Then the rover angels gather around 
these assemblies and hear the words, ‘O remember ye God and give 
warning to one another.” The [practice] has been altered in favour 
of story' telling, the recital of poems, ecstatic utterances (shath) and 
heresies ( tammat ), 2 the things which contemporary preachers persist 
in doing. 

As to story telling, it is an innovation; in fact, our Fathers have 
warned against attending the circles of story-tellers saying that it was 
not the custom either at the time of the Apostle of God or the time of 
abu-Bakr and ‘Umar . 3 It was not until the appearance of heresy that 
they made theirs. It has been related that one day ibn-‘Umar emerged 
from the mosque exclaiming, “No one had sent me out but the story- 
teller; but for him I would not have left.” Damrah 4 said, “One day 
I asked Sufyan al-Thawri, “Shall we listen to story-tellers?” But he 
answered, “Turn ye your backs on innovations.” 

Ibn-‘ Awn 5 said, “Once upon a time I called on ibn-Sirin . 6 As 
I entered upon him he asked me, “What is new today?” When I 
informed him that the governor had prohibited the story-tellers from 
telling their stories, he said, “He had done correctly.” It is also 
related that, once upon a time, as al-A‘mash 7 entered the Basrah 
mosque, he heard a story-teller say in his sermon, “We were told by 
al-A‘mash...’\ Whereupon al-A‘mash took himself to the centre of 
the mosque and began to remove the hair from his armpit, at which 
the speaker indignantly shouted, “Old man, are you not ashamed to 
do that in the mosque?” To which al-A‘mash replied, “Why should 

1. Al-Qazw’ni, ‘Ajatib al-Makhluqat, p. 61. Ci al-Tinr.idhi, Da‘awat, 129. 

2. Literally signifies calamities. 

3. Cf. ibtt-Kiajah, Adaab, 40. 

4. Ibn-Rabi'ah (A.H. 202/A.D. 817-8): see ibn-Sa V, Vo!, VD, Pt. 2, p. 173; 
Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, Vol. 1, p. 322. 

5. ‘Abdullah ibn-'Awn ibn-Artaban (A.H. 151/A D. 769): see ibn-Sa 'd, Vol 7, 
Pt. 2, pp. 24-30. 

6 Muhammad (A.H. 1 1 0/A.D 729): see ibn-Sa d, Vol. VII, Pt. I, pp. 140-50. 
7. Abu-Muhammad Sulavman ibn-Mihran (A.H. 148/A.D. 765); see ibn-Sa 'd, 
Vol, VI, pp. 238-40. 


81 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


I be ashamed? What I am doing is according to the law 1 while what 
you have been saying are down right lies. 1 am al-A‘mash.” 

Ahmad [ibn-Hanbal] proclaimed that the most persistent liars 
among men are the story-tellers and the beggars. 

‘Ali ibn-abi-Talib once drove the story-tellers out of the 
Basrah mosque, but when he heard the words of al-Hasan al-Basri 
he allowed him to earn' on and did not drive him out because al- 
Hasan al-Basri used to discourse on the science of the hereafter and 
the contemplation of death, and to point out the defects of the soul, 
the shortcoming of works, the passing thoughts with which Satan 
tempts men and the way to resist them, and to remind his audience of 
the favours and blessings of God and of the failure of man in his 
gratitude. He also would expose the inferiority of this world, its 
defects, its impending end, and its deceitfulness, as well as the 
dangers and the terrors of the hereafter. This is the warning which, 
according to the law, is praiseworthy and which has been encou raged 
in the tradition related by abu-Dharr when he said, “To be present 
in an assembly of invocation ( dhikr ) is betterthan prostrating oneself 
in prayer a thousand times, or visiting a thousand sick men, or 
attending a thousand funerals.” Abu-Dharr further related that the 
Prophet was then asked; “Is it also better than the reading of the 
Qur’an?” To which the Prophet replied, “What good, though, is the 
reading of the Qur’an except through knowledge?” ‘ Ata’ also said, 
“Attendance at an assembly of invocation atones the evils of 
attending seventy places of entertainment.” 

Unfortunately, however, those who are in the habit of 
embellishing their speech with lies have taken these traditions as 
means of justification for themselves and have appropriated the name 
warning (tadhkir) for their fables thus forgetting the right path of 
praiseworthy invocation (dhikr) and spending their time in 
[recounting] tales which are subject to variations, accretions, and 
deletions, and which deviate from the stories which accrue in the 

I Cf al-Rukhari, Libas, 64. Isti'dhan, 51. 


Qur’an and go beyond them. Some of the tales are good to hear while 
others are harmful in spite of the feet that they may be true. Whoever 
would go after this practice would no longer be able to distinguish 
truth from lies and what is good from that which is harmful. For this 
reason Ahmad ibn-Hanbal said, “Oh how much do people need a 
truthful story-teller?” If his story be one of the tales of the prophets, 
pertaining to the affairs of their religion, and the story-teller be 
truthful and trustworthy, I see no harm in it. But people should guard 
against lies and against such stories which point to trivial faults and 
compromises which the common folks fail to understand, or to 
realize that they are nothing but trivial and unusual faults although 
they have been followed by atoning deeds and rectified by good 
works which are supposed to make up for them. In order to justify his 
compromises and find for himself an excuse, the layman is apt to 
resort to such reasoning, protesting that such and such has been 
related on the authority of one of the masters ( mashayikh ) or one of 
the prominent men, and adding that whereas all of us were subject to 
sin, it is no wonder ifhe would disobey God especially since a greater 
person than himself has done the same. This also develops in him 
unwillingly the daring to disobey God. But if one should guard 
against these two dangers (which are inherent in story-telling) it 
would cease to be harmful for it will mark a return to the praiseworthy 
stories contained in the Qur’an and to the authentic stories of 
tradition. There are some, however, who take the liberty of making 
up stories which inspire in men the desire to worship and serve God, 
and claim that they seek thereby nothing but to call men to the truth. 
Nevertheless this is one of the baits of Satan, and there is no way to 
avoid lying but in truthfulness. Besides there is in what God and His 
Apostle said enough to render fabrication in preaching needless. Did 
not the Prophet abhor the affectation or rhymed prose regarding it 
pedantic? 

On hearing his son ‘Umar 1 indulge is rhymed prose, S‘ad ibn- 


1. A.H. 66 A.D. 685-6; See ibn-S 'ad, Vol. V, p. 125;abul-Fi<b\M«iW»ta*ar 
Ta'rikh al-Bashar (Constantinople, 1286), Vol. I, p. 205. 


82 


83 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


abi-Waqqas' said to him as die former sought something from his 
father, “This,myson, would make me hate thee; I shall not grant thee 
thy request until thou should cease to compose rhymed prose. ” The 
Prophet also said to ‘Abdullah ibn-Rawahah 2 when the latter 
composed three rhymed sentences, “Beware of rhymed prose, O thou 
ibn-Rawahah.” Consequently any rhymed prose which exceeds two 
sentences has been deemed affected and hence forbidden. For the 
same reason when (in connection with the bloodwit which should be 
paid for smiting a woman so that the child in her womb dies) a certain 
man asked, “How shall we pay a bloodwit for the death of someone 
who has had no drink nor food, neither has he cried nor shed any tears 
since such a person is not avenged?” the Prophet reproached him 
saying, “Art thou, like Bedouins, indulging in rhymed prose ?” 3 

As to poetry, its generous use in sermons is blameworthy God 
said, “It is poets whom the erring follow: Seest thou not how they 
rove distraught in every valley ?” 4 And again, “We have not taught 
him (i.e. Muhammad) poetry, nor would it beseem him .” 5 
Furthermore, most of the poetry with which the preachers are 
familiar and which they are accustomed to repeat in their sermons 
pertains to claims of being in love, the beauty of the beloved, the joys 
of union with him, and the pains of separation; while the assembly 
comprises none but the crude among the common folk whose minds 
are saturated with lust and their eyes never cease from staring at fair 
feces. Their poetry inspires nothing in their hearts except that which 
their hearts already conceal, and enkindles therein the flames of lust 
Consequently they begin to shriek and make a show of their love. 
Most of this, if not all, is the result of a certain kind of corruption 

1. One of the ten promised Paradise by Muhammad, one of the council of six 

in whose hands ‘Umar left the future of the caliphate, and one of the 
greatest ofMuslim generals during the early period of the conquests It was 
S*ad who conquered Persia. Died between A.H. SS and 58/A.D. 675 adn 
678. See ibn-Sa‘d, Vol. ID, Pt. I , pp. 275-8. 

A H. 8/A.D. 629-30: ibn-Sa‘d, Vol, ID, Ot. 2, pp. 79-82; Tahdhib-al- 
Asma', pp. 340-41. 

Muslim, al-Qasamah, 11:5 
Surah XXVI: 22-45. 

Surah XXXVI: 69 


Therefore no poetry should be used unless it contains a moral or a 
wise saying and should only be used either as evidence or for 
example. 

The Prophet of God said, “Verily some poetry is wisdom.”* 
If only the elite whose hearts are known to be absorbed in the love of 
God should frequent these assemblies alone, on poetry whose 
outward meaning dealt with people would be of any harm because, 
as it will be seen in the Book on Audition and Music, a person would 
always interpret all that he would hear according to the light which 
dominates his heart. Al-Junayd used to discourse before some ten 
people or there about and whenever the number went beyond that he 
would stop. Thus his circle never reached twenty in number. Once 
upon a time when a crowd gathered before the door of ibn-Salim’s 2 
house, someone requested him to address them saying, “Your 
followers have come.” To which ibn-Salim replied. “No! these are 
not my followers; they are the followers of the assembly. As to my 
followers, they are elite.” 

By ecstatic utterances we mean two types of speech evolved 
by some of the Sufis. The first comprises long pretentious claims of 
excessive love ( ishq) of God and of union iyvisat) which renders 
outward deeds superfluous until some have asserted oneness (ittihad) 
with God, the removal of the veil (hijab), seeing ( mushahadah ) Him 
with the eye ( ru yah), and mouth to mouth conversation. They thus 
say that they were told such and such and that they have said such and 
such and imitate thereby al-Husayn ibn-Mansur al-Hallaj 3 who was 
gibbeted for letting slip from his lips certain words of this type, and 
cite as an example his saying, “I AM THE TRUTH” (Ana ’l-Haqq). 


1 . Ibn-Majah, Adab, 4 1 ; al-Darimi, Isti'dhan, 68. 

2. Abu-al-Hasan ibn-Saalim, mentioned by ibn-Khallikan, Vol. 0, p. 297, in 
the narrative on the life of abu-Talib alMakki 

3. The great mystic theologian: he was gibbeted on Dhu-al-Qa’dah 24, 309/ 
March 26, 922, and finally was decapitated and burnt. See ibn-Khallikan, 
Vol. I, pp. 261-3. 


2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 


84 


85 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Similarly, it has been related that abu-Yazid ai-Bastami 1 once said, 

“Praise be to me! Praise be to me!” This is, in tnith, a type of speech 

which, to die common folk, is of great harm, so much so that several 
farmers have relinquished their forms and proclaimed similar claims. 
Such speech, moreover, is attractive to human nature for it offers 
relief from work as well as self-justification through the attainment 
of certain stations (maqamat) and the experience of certain 
( ahwal ). Consequently, the ignorant do not foil to claim these things 
for themselves nor to swallow up such confused and embellished 
words. And no matter how much their claims are disapproved they 
do not hesitate to say that such disapproval has been the outcome of 
knowledge and disputation, the one is a veil and the other is the work 
of the self, while their words are not understood except from within 
through revelation by the light of the Truth. These and similar other 
words have spread like fire in the land and their harm to the common 
folk has become great. To destroy the person who comes out with 
such words is, according to the religion of God, better than sparing 
ten lives. 

As to abu-Yazid al-Bistami what has been ascribed to him of 
such words cannot be true. Even if he were heard saying them, most 
probably he must have been repeating to himself words about God; 
for example he might have been heard quoting the words of God, 
“Verily, I am God: there is no God but Me: therefore worship Me .” 1 
These words should not have been taken in any other way besides that 
of a quotation. 

The second type of ecstatic utterance comprises unintelligible 
words with pleasing externals of which some, through awesome, are 
useless. They may be of two kinds: The first and the more common 
comprises words unintelligible to the author who utters than because 
of the perplexity in his own mind and the confusion in his imagination 

1 Also al-Bistami; (A H. 261 or 264/A.D. 875 or 878). See ibn-Khallikan, 
Vol. I, p. 429: al-Hujw-ri, Kashf al-Mahjub , tr. R.A. Nicholson (Leyden, 
1911), pp. 106-8: al-Sha'rani al-Taabaqat al-Kubra (Cairo, 1343), Vol 
1. PP 61,2. 

2. Sumh XX: 14. 

86 


resulting from his ignorance of the exact meaning of words which he 
hears; while the second represents words which may be intelligible 
to their author who, however, because of his insufficient practice in 
science and his lack of instruction in rhetoric, is unable to convey 
them to others through language which can express his thoughts. 
Such words are of no use except to confuse the heart, amaze the mind, 
and perplex the understanding. They are also apt to convey a meaning 
other than that for which they are intended so that anyone may find 
in them the meaning which his own nature may desire. 

The Prophet said, “Never does any one of you relate a 
tradition which is beyond the ability of the audience to understood 
without becoming a cause of corruption among them.” And again, 
“Communicate with people in terms known to them and discard 
those which are unknown. Do you desire to see God and His Apostle 
disbelieved?” This has been said of words which the author 
understands but fails to convey their meaning to the mind of his 
audience. How then would it be with words whose meaning neither 
the author nor the audience understand when those which the former 
understands while his audience do not are forbidden to relate? 

Jesus said, “Entrust not wisdom to those unworthy of it lest 
ye do it injustice; nor withhold it from those who are worthy of it lest 
ye do them injustice. Be ye therefore like the skilful physician who 
applies the medicine to the sore spot .” 1 And according to another 
version, “Whoever should entrust wisdom to those unworthy of it 
would reveal his ignorance, and whosoever should withhold it from 
those who are worthy of it would perpetrate an injustice. Verily 
wisdom hath a right as well as a people worthy of it. Give, therefore, 
each his right .” 2 

As to heresies ( tammat ), they comprise, besides what we have 
already mentioned under the ecstatic utterances ( shath ) another thing 
characteristic of them, namely, the dismissal of the obvious and 
literal meaning of words in favour of an esoteric interpretation of 

1. Cf Matt. 7:6,9: 16-17. 

2. Cf Matt. 11:19: Luke 7:35. 

87 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


worthless value such as the Batinite 1 method of interpretation which 
is unlawful and of great harm; because when words are given other 
than their literal meanings, without either the authority of the 
traditions of the Prophet or the dictates of reason, the loss of faith in 
words becomes inevitable and die benefits of the words of God and 
His Aposde are in consequence nullified. Little trust can be placed 
in whatever is understood therefrom while its esoteric meaning 
cannot be determined; rather opinions differ therein and it is open tc 
many interpretations. This too belongs to those widespread and very 
harmful innovations. The authors of those innovations have sought 
nothing but the unusual because human nature is fond of the strange 
and the unusual and delights in anything uncommon. 

Through this very thing were the Batinites successful in 
destroying all the law, by interpreting its letter to conform to their 
way of thinking as we have shown in theMustazhiri Book 2 which was 
composed for the purpose of refuting their views. 

An example of the interpretations put forth by these heretics 
may be seen in the assertion ofoneofthem that in the verse where God 
addresses Moses saying, “Go unto Pharaoh, for he hath trespassed ,” 3 
the word Pharaoh stands for the heart of Moses, the heart being the 
trespasser against every man. Again when God said to Moses, “Go, 
cast down thine staff ’ 4 the word staff is said to represent anything 
besides God on which man may depend [and in which he may place 
his trust], and should therefore be cast away. The same kind of 
interpretation is applied to the words of the Prophet when he said, 
“Go, eat the daybreak meal ( sahr ), for therein lies blessing. ” 5 These 
words are interpreted to mean the asking of God’s forgiveness at day- 
break. They set forth similar interpretations thereby tampering with 

1. On the Batinite. sceal-Shahrastani, pp. 147-52: al-Baghdadi , Mukhtasar 

Kitab al-Farq bayn al-Firaq. ed. P.K. Hitti (Cairo, 1 924), pp. 1 70-6. 

2. So named after the Caliph ai-Mustazhir (A.D. 1094-1 118) on whose 

request it was composed. It is also known as,Fud‘ihal-Batinyah. It was 

edited together with a German translation by 1 . Glodziher (Leyden, 1916) 

3. Surah LXXIX: 17. 

4. Cf Surahs VD: 1 14: XXVII: 10: XXVEH: 31. 

5. Al-Tirmidhi Sawm, 17. al Darimi. Siyam. 9. 


the literal meaning of the whole Quran and altering its interpretation 
which has come down to us on the authority' of ibn-‘ Abbas and other 
learned men. 

Some of these interpretations are obviously and completely 
corrupt, as is, for example, the interpretation of the word Pharaoh to 
mean heart. Pharaoh was real and historical and so was Moses’ 
summons to him. He was like abu-Jahl, 1 abu-Lahab, 2 and other of the 
unbelievers, and in no way like either the demons or the angels who 
are not perceived by the senses, and w hose names are, therefore, open 
to interpretation. Similarly to interpret the occasion of the eating of 
the daybreak meal as the time for asking God’s forgiveness is equally 
corrupt. The Prophet used to eat the daybreak meal and say, “Come, 
eat the daybreak meal: Gather for the blessed dinner.” The corrupt 
nature of such interpretation is determined both by the testimony of 
tradition and by that of the senses, while others which pertain to 
objects beyond the realm of the senses are probably the same. All, 
besides being unlawful, are also the cause of confusion and corruption 
to people in their religion. Nothing of these interpretations, has come 
down to us on the authority of either the Companions, or their 
followers [ al-tabiun ], or even al-Hasn al-Basri, in spite of his 
continual teaching and preaching among men. 

There appears, therefore, no other meaning for the words of 
the Prophet when he said, “Whoever should explain the Qur’an in 
accordance with his own opinion will occupy his place in Hell,” 3 than 
the following: when a person is intent upon establishing and proving 
something he will drag in proofs from the Qur’an and will apply them 
to his point without the existence of any linguistic or historical 
evidence which justifies his contention. This, however, does not • 
mean that the Qur’an should not be explained through intelligence 

1 One of Muhammad’s most bitter opponents. He once threatened to set his 

foot on the Prophet’s neck when prostrate in prayer. See Surah XCVI: 
9-19: bn-Hisham, pp. 190-91. 

2. An uncle of the Prophet and one of his most violent enemies. See Surah 
CXI: ibn-Hisham, pp. 231 see: 244, 430, 461. 

3. Al-Tirmidhi, Tafsir al-Our'an, 1 . 


88 


89 


The Book of Knowledge 


and thinking, since some verses have been given by the Companions 
and the commentators five, six and even seven interpretations, all of 
which, it is well known, were not heard from the Prophet. Some of 
these interpretation may be contradictory', incapable of reconciliation, 
and are therefore ascertained only through keen understanding and 
profound thinking. For this reason the Prophet prayed for ibn-‘ Abbas 
saying, “O God! Enlighten him in religion and teach him 
interpretation” 1 Therefore whoever allows the perpetrators of heresies 
such interpretations in spite of his knowledge that the w ords do not 
possess any such meaning claiming that he only intends thereby the 
exhortation of men to follow God, w'ould be like the person who 
allow's attributing false and fabricated sayings to the prophets 
relative to things which, in themselves, are true but concerning which 
the law handed down no legislation, or like him wbo coins a hadith 
to cover anything which he deems right. Such a thing is decidedly a 
transgression and a cause of confusion as w'ell as a sin which merits 
and incurs the threat implied in the w'ords ofthe Prophet when he said, 
“Whoever should deliberately lie to me, would occupy his place in 
Hell . ” 2 Indeed, the interpretation of these w'ords in such a manner is 
greater transgression because it undermines the faith in the meaning 
of words and destroys altogether the only way by which they could 
be understood and be useful. 

You have thus learned how Satan has diverted men from 
seeking the praiseworthy science to the study of the blameworthy. 
This is all the result of the ambiguity caused by the changes in the 
names of the sciences which the teachers of falsehood have effected. 
If you w ould follow them depending on the prevalent significations 
of these terms at the present time regardless of what they signified 
during the first century, you would be like him who sought the honour 
which is the reward of wisdom by attaching himself to anyone who 
is called wise (hakim), a term which, because of the change in the 
meaning of words, is at the present time applied equally to the 
physician, the poet, and the astrologer. 

I. Ibn-Sa'd , Vol D, pt. 2, p. 120, 11, 3-4: Cf. ibn-Majah. Intro., 1 1 al- 

Timtidhi , Manaqb, 42, 

Al-Dahmi, Intro., 25: ibn-Majah, Intro., 16. 

90 


The Book of Knowledge 

The fifth term to have been altered is wisdom (hikmah), since 
we see that it has now become customary to apply the word wise 
(hakim) equally to the physician, the poet, the astrologer, and even 
to him who reads fortunes for the peasants who squat on street 
comers. Wisdom, however, is that which God commended when He 
said, “He giveth wisdom to whom He will: and he to whom wisdom 
is given, hath had much good given him” 1 The Prophet also said, “A 
word of wisdom which man learns is better to him than the world and 
all that is in it.” See, therefore, what wisdom stood for and to what 
it has been altered, and examine, in the same way, the other terms. 
Beware, then, of being deceived by the ambiguities of the teachers of 
falsehood: their evil influence upon religion is greater than that of 
Satan, because through their aid does he arrive at removing religion 
from the hearts of men. For this reason when the Prophet was '.sked 
who were the most wicked among men he would not at first answer 
but said, “Forgive, O God ” When his inquirers persisted in their 
query he replied, “The most wicked among men are the teachers of 
falsehood.” 

You have now been shown both the praiseworthy and the 
blameworthy sciences as well as the causes of ambiguity. Ydurs is 
the choice either to follow the example of the Fathers, or to succumb 
to deception and emulate those who came after. 

All knowledge which the Fathers approved has vanished, 
while most of what people now pursue falls under the category of 
innovations and made-up novelties. The Prophet was right when he 
said, Islam began as a strange element and will become thus again 
as it was at the beginning. Blessed, therefore, are the strangers.” He 
was then asked who where the strangers to which he replied, “The 
strangers are those who rectify what people have corrupted of my law 
as well as those who revive what they have destroyed of it.‘- 
According to another report, “The strangers are those who hold fast 
to the belief which you now possess’” while according to another, 
“The strangers are a few righteous people in the midst of many 
1. Surah D: 272. 

2 Cf a 1 -Dari mi, Riqaq, 42: al-Tirmidhi Iman, 1 3: ibn-Majah , Fitan, 15 

91 


2 . 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


unrighteous, whose haters outnumber those who love them.” The 
praiseworthy sciences have also grown unfamiliar and unpopular 
among men to the extent that those who dare mention them are 
despised. For this reason al-Thawri had said, “If you see a learned 
man who has many friends, you may be sure he is a charlatan and a 
faker, because if he would speak the truth, those friends would hate 
him.” 

Determining how Much is Praiseworthy (to 
Acquire) of the praiseworthy sciences 

You should know that, in this respect, science is divided into 
three parts. One part is that whose knowledge is blameworthy 
whether it be in part or in toto. Another is that whose partial as well 
as total knowledge is praiseworthy; in fact the more one acquires of 
it the better. The third is that whose knowledge is praiseworthy within 
a certain limit, that of sufficiency, but beyond that it ceases to be 
praiseworthy: to go into it deeply is not desirable. This is best 
illustrated by the human body: that which is praiseworthy, whether 
little of it or much, is like health and beauty while that which is 
blameworthy, whether little of it or much, is like ugliness and bad 
temper. On the other hand there are things which are praiseworthy 
when they are found in moderation like the spending of money where 
extravagance is not praiseworthy although it is spending; and like 
courage where recklessness is undesirable although it is a type of 
courage. The same thing is true of knowledge. 

The part whose partial and total knowledge is blameworthy is 
that which has no use either in the realm of religion or in the domain 
of life because its harmfulness exceeds its utility, such as the science 
of magic talismans, and astrology, parts of which are of no use 
whatever and to spend one’s life, the most precious thing a man 
possesses, in them is sheer waste; and to waste anything precious is 
blameworthy. Other parts of these sciences are of greater harm than 
the good they are deemed to perform in life, which good, when 
compared to the harm resulting therefrom, becomes of no 
consequence. 


The part whose knowledge, even to the limit of thoroughness, 
is praiseworthy is the science of knowing God, His attributes and 
works as well as His law which governs His creatures and His 
wisdom in ordaining the superiority of the hereafter to this life. The 
knowledge of this is incumbent upon man both for itself and also for 
attaining thereby the bliss of the hereafter. To exert oneself even to 
the utmost capacity of one’s effort, falls short of what is required 
because it is like the sea. Its depth cannot be sounded and men can 
approach its shores and edges only to the extent to which it has been 
made possible for them, while no one has navigated its ends except 
the prophets, the saints, and those who are grounded in the science 
of God — each according to his rank and ability' and according to 
what God has preordained for them therein. This is the hidden science 
which is never recorded in books but whose knowledge may be at first 
promoted by learning and by contemplating the states of the learned 
man in the science of the hereafter whose characteristics we shall 
discuss later. Its knowledge may be furthered 1 through self- 
mortification, discipline, and through purifying the heart and freeing 
it from the affairs of this world as well as through emulating the 
prophets and the saints so that it may be revealed to every seeker in 
proportion to God’s mercy (rizq) on him rather than in proportion to 
his efforts and labours (jahd ). Yet diligence in it is indispensable for 
self-mortification which is the sole key to guidance. 

The sciences whose knowledge is praiseworthy up to a certain 
limit are those which we have already mentioned under the sciences 
the acquisition of whose knowledge is a fard kifayah 2 . Every one of 
these sciences has three stages: first limitation ( iqtisid) which is the 
intermediary, and third thoroughness ( istiqsi ) which is a sequel to 
moderation and which goes on and on during the entire life of the 
seeker. Be, therefore, one of two: either one who educates himself, or 
one who concerns himself with the education of others after he had 
educated himself. Never, however, concern yourself with reforming 
others before you have first reformed yourself. If you are educating 

1 . In text “furthered in the hereafter”. 

2. See Supra, p. 36. 


92 


93 



The Book of Knowledge 


yourself take up only those branches of knowledge which have been 
required of you according to your needs, as well as those which 
pertain to the outward deeds such as learning the elements of prayer, 
purification, and fasting. More important, however, is the science 
which all have neglected, namely, the science of the attributes of the 
heart, those which are praiseworthy and those which are blameworthy, 
because people persist in the latter such as miserliness, hypocrisy, 
pride, and conceit and the like, all of which are destructive and 
desisting therefrom is obligatory. Performing those outward deeds is 
like the external application of ointment to the body when it is 
stricken with scabies and boils while neglecting to remove the pus by 
means of surgery 1 or purge. False scholars recommend outward 
deeds just as fake physicians prescribe external ointments for 
virulent internal diseases. The learned men of the hereafter 
recommend nothing but the purification of the inner-self and the 
removal of the elements of evil by destroying their nursery-beds and 
uprooting them from the heart. It is only because of the easenvhich 
characterizes the works of the senses and the difficult nature of the 
works of the heart that most people have neglected the purification 
of their hearts and devoted themselves to the outward deeds, just as 
he who finds it disagreeable to drink a bitter medicine resorts to the 
external application of ointments and persists in his labours, 
continually increasing the ingredients, while his ailments multiply. 
If, therefore, you are desirous of the hereafter, seeking salvation and 
running away from eternal damnation, pursue the science of spiritual 
(batinah) diseases and their remedies, as we have described it in the 
Quarter on the Destructive Matters in Life, which will lead you to the 
praiseworthy stations mentioned in the Quarter on the Saving 
Matters in Life; because no sooner is the heart purged from what is 
blameworthy than it is filled wife that which is praiseworthy just as 
the soil where all kinds of plants and flowers would grow as soon as 
the grass is weeded out — unless the weeds are removed neither 
plants nor flowers would grow. Therefore do not pursue those 
branches ofknowledge whose acquisition is a fard kifayah especially 

1. Lit. bleeding. 


The Book of Knowledge 


when they have already been taken up by some. He who would spend 
himself in pursuing what would reform others [while he himself 
remains unredeemed] is insolent and how utterly foolish is the man 
who, when snakes and scorpions have crept beneath his clothes, is 
busy looking for a whisk wherewith to drive flies off other people, a 
task which will neither spare nor save him from the attacks of the 
snakes and scorpions lurking beneath his clothes. If on the other hand 
you have completed the task of purifying yourself and have been 
successful in abstaining from outward and inward sin so that purity 
of the heart and abstinence from sin have become to you a religion and 
a second nature, which thing is very unlikely, then you may pursue 
those branches ofknowledge whose acquisition is fard kifayah. You 
should, however, observe gradual progress therein beginning with 
the Book of God, then the Usage of His Apostle, then the science of 
interpretation and the other sciences of the Qur’an such as that of the 
abrogating and the abrogated ( al-nasikh w-al-mansukh ),' the related 
and the unrelated ( al-mawsul w-al-mafsal ) 2 and the clear and the 
ambiguous ( al-muhkam w-mutashabih) 3 . The same gradual procedure 
should be observed in the study of the Usage of the Prophet after 
which you may proceed to the study of applied jurisprudence (Juru j 
which is the elaboration of positive law under the wider science of 
jurisprudence. You then may proceed to the sources of jurisprudence 
(usul al-fiqh) and to fee other sciences as far as the span of life 
permits and time allows. Do not spend, however, all your life in one 
of these sciences seeking to exhaust the subject thoroughly, because 
knowledge is of varied and numerous branches and life is short. 
Furthermore these sciences are only introductory means sought not 
for themselves but for the sake of something else and in everything 
which is sought as a means for fee attainment of another thing, one ‘ 
should not loose sight of fee end. Limit yourself, then, in fee study of 
vernacular speech, to that which would enable you to understand and 
speak the Arab tongue and in the study of the strange words confine 

1 . See al-Suyuti, al-Itaan fi-Ulum al-Qur ' an (Cairo, 1 343). Vol. A, pp. 20- 
27. 

2. Ibid Vol. I, pp. 90-91. 

3. Cf Surah DT, 5; Al-Suvuti, Itqan, Vol. n, PP. 2-13. 


94 


95 



The Book of Knowledge 


your efforts to those occurring in the Qur’an and the tradition; even 
then avoid going into them profoundly. As to syntax, limit yourself 
also to what pertains to the Qur’an and the tradition, since in every 
branch of knowledge there are three degrees of acquisition, namely 
limitation, moderation, and thoroughness. We* shall here describe 
each of these three as they relate to the science of tradition, 
interpretation, jurisprudence, and theology in order to offer a standard 
with which other subjects may be measured. 

The limited degree of acquisition in interpretation covers 
about twice the size of the Qur’an, i.e., similar to al-Wajiz 1 which 
‘Ali al-Wahidi al-Naysabari 2 3 composed; the moderate degree is 
equivalent to three times the size of the Qur’an, i.e., similar to al- 
Wt isiP by the same author. Beyond these two degrees of acquisition 
is that ofthorougli exhaustion which can be dispensed with; the entire 
lifetime may expire in its pursuit. 

In tradition the limited degree is represented by the mastery of 
the two Sahihs* as corrected by one well-informed in the science of 
the texts of tradition. As to the authorities of the two Sahihs, those 
who preceded you have spared you the trouble and you may depend 
on their books for that information. Nor need you memorize the texts 
of the two Sahihs but familiarize yourself with them so that you may 
be able, when the need arises, to lay your hand on whatever you may 
want. The moderate degree of acquisition in the field of the hadith 
includes, besides, the two Sahihs, the other authoritative corpuses . 5 

1 . Al-Wajtzfi Tafsiral-Quran al-Aziz printed in Cairo, A.H. 1 305. 

2. A H. 468/A.D. 1076: see ibn-Khallikan. Vol. 0. pp. 8-9. 

3. Al-li'asit bayn al-Aaqbud w-al-Basit unpublished: see Hajj Khalifah Vol. 
VI, oo. 436-7; W. Ahlwardt, Verzichniiss der Arabischen Handschrften 
der Koniglichen Bibliothek zu Berlin (Berlin. 1887-99), Nos. 750-2. 

4. That of al-Bukhari and that of Muslim', Printed several times. 

5. These are the six authoritative corpuses which comprise, besides the two 
Sah ihs, the following: The Sunan of abu-Dawud al-Sijstani (A.H. 275 
A.D. 888), printed in Cairo. A.H. 1280, the Sunan of ibn-Majah (A.H. 
273/A.D.887), printed in Cairo, A.H. 1340; the Sahih of al-Tirmidhi 
(A H. 279 A D. 892), printed in Cairo, A.H. 1290; and theAujtaba of al- 
Nastt'i, (A.H. 303 A D. 915), lithographed in Delhi, A.H. 1315 

Could., next page 


The Book of Knowledge 


Beyond this is thorough exhaustion of the subject which requires the 
detailed mastery of all traditions including weak (duaij) traditions, 
[about whose authenticity serious doubts can be raised], the strong 
(qawi), [those utterly faultless traditions in whose isnad there is no 
weakness and whose tendency does not contradict any generally 
prevalent belief], the genuine (sahih) [fulfilling all conditions], and 
the corrupt (saqim), as well as knowing the several ways of hadith 
transmission with knowledge of the qualification of each authority, 
his names and characteristics. 

As to jurisprudence, the limited degree of acquisition is 
equivalent to the contents of the Mukhtasar 1 of al-Muzahi 2 which 
> work we rearranged in our Khulasat al-Mukhiasarf the moderate 

» degree is three times as long and is equivalent to the material we have 

included in our al-Wasit min al-Madhhab : 4 while the degree of 
thoroughness is represented by our al-Basit 5 and by other 
comprehensive works. 

As to theology ( al-Kalam ), it is solely designed to safeguard 
the articles of faith which the followers of the Usage of the Prophet 
and righteous Fathers transmitted down to us, and nothing else. 
Anything beyond this would be an attempt to reveal the truth of things 
in other than its proper way. The purpose of learning the Usage ofthe 
Prophet is to attain, through a concise creed, the limited degree of its 
knowledge. This is equivalent to the contents of the Bode on the 


Conid. To these six may be added the Muwatta ’ of Malik ibn-Anas (A.H. 179, 
A. D. 795 ), printed several times; ihcMusand of al-Darimi (A.H. 225 A.D. 
869) printed in Damascus, A.H. 1349; and the Musnad of Ahmad ibn- 
Hanbal (A.H. 241. A.D.855), (first three volumes printed in Cairo d.). 

1 . Al-Mukhtasar al-Saghir, printed in Bulaq, A.H. 1321-6. 

2. Abu-Ibrahim Isma'il ibn-Yahya (A.H. 264, A.D. 878); see al-Fihrist p. 
212; ibn-Khallikan, Vol. 1, pp. 124-5. 

3. Unpublished; see al-Subki, Vol. IV, p. 1 16, 1.5. 

4. Unpublished, see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. p. 246; Fihrist al-Kutub al-Arab 
yah al-Mahfuzah bi-al-Kutubhanah al-Hhidaywiyah, Vol. 01 Cairo, 
1 306), pp. 289-90. (Henceforth will be referred to as Cairo Catalogue. 

5. Unpublished; see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. 0, p. 246; Cairo Catalogue, Vol. 
OL, pp. 1978. 


96 


8 


97 


The Book of Knowledge 


Articles of Faith which is a part of this work. 1 2 The moderate degree 
would equal about a hundred leaves representing the contents of our 
work, al-lqtisad fi al-l'tiqad , 2 and is indispensable in debating 
innovators and answering their heresies with what will remove and 
destroy their influence over the heart of the common man. This is of 
use among the common people only before their fanaticism becomes 
for gone, because no mere words would convince the innovator once 
he had acquired a smattering of the science of argumentation. Even 
if you silence him in arguments, he would not relinquish his ideas but 
would protest his inability in debates asserting that your argument 
can be met although he himself is incapable of it and he only was 
confused by your debating acumen. 

Furthermore when the common men, through some kind of an 
argument, have been diverted from die truth, it is quite possible, while 
their fanaticism in these errors is still not far genie, to bring them back 
to it through similar arguments. But if fanaticism becomes rooted in 
their hearts their redemption becomes hopeless because fanaticism 
fastens beliefs deeply to the minds of men. It is one of the evils of the 
teachers of falsehood who go to excess in their fanaticism for the truth 
and regard with contempt and scorn all non-conformists . This drives 
the nonconformists to further spite and encourages them to seek the 
support of falsehood. Interest in holding fast to their position is 
thereby strengthened. If, instead, these fanatics would approach their 
opponents privately in a spirit of kindness, sympathy, and advice 
rather than attack them publicly in the spirit ofbigotry and acrimony, 
they might succeed in their effort. But whereas prestige requires a 
following and nothing attracts a following better than bigotry, 
cursing and vilifying of opponents, they have adopted fanaticism as 
their rule of conduct .and their method of approach. F inall y they call 
this a defence of religion and a protection for the Muslims, while in 
foot it results in nothing but the destruction of all people and in the 
firm establishment of innovation in their minds. 

1. It comprises Bk. H of the Quarter on the Acts of Worship; see infra ; cf. 

Hajji Khalifah, Vol. IV, p. 575. 

2. Printed in Cairo, 2nd ed , A H. 1327. 


98 


The Book of Knowledge 



Beware, therefore, of coming near these controversies that 
have sprung up in these recent times arid on which have been written 
masterpieces of publications, compositions and argumentations the 
like of which have neither beat seen nor heard by the Fathers. Avoid 
them as you avoid deadly poison for they are like a virulent disease. 
It was these controversies which have driven all jurisprudents after 
rivalry and boasting which will be discussed later together with their 
hazards and evils. 


You may hear it said: “Men are the enemies of things they do 
not know.” Do not, however, accept this as law. You have stumbled 
upon one who knows; accept, therefore, this advice from one who has 
wasted his life in [controversies] and surpassed the ancients in 


composition, research, argumentation, and exposition until God 
inspired him with His righteousness and made known to him the flaws 
tk/>»>in rVmcMiuOTitl v he ahinred controversies and turned his attention 


to himself. Do not be deceived by the words of those who say that the 


giving off legal opinions is the pillar of the law, but know not its 
principles except through the science of argumentation, while the 
principles of religion are contained in the books of religion and 
whatever accretions are added thereto are nothing but wranglings 


which neither the ancients nor the Companions, who were better 


versed in die principles of legal opinions than any other group, had 
known. These wranglings are not only useless for the science of 
religion, but are also harmful and corrupting to one’s taste and 
judgement in jurisprudence. Thus in most cases it is usually not 
possible to have a decision, backed by the opinion of a judge whose 
good taste in legal matters is established, conform to the rulers of 
debate. Whoever is familiar with the syllogisms of controversy will 


submit to the rules of debater rather than follow legal taste. Only 


those who seek repute and prestige and feign that they are striving 
after the principles of religion pursue controversy in which they 
spend their lifetime without makirig the slightest effort towards the 
science of religion. You need not fear the Devil but beware of men 
who have relieved the Devil of the task of tempting and misleading 


people. 


99 



The Book of Knowledge 


In sum, what is acceptable among the wise is to assume that 
you are alone with God in this universe while before you lie death, 
resurrection, judgement. Paradise and hell. Consider then what 
concerns you of all these and ignore the rest. 

A certain Sheikh saw in a dream one of the teamed men and 
said to him, “What has happened to those sciences in which you used 
to argue and debate?” The learned man, stretched the palm of his 
hand open and, blowing over it, said: “It has all vanished like 
scattered dust I have not benefited except from two prostrations 
which I have performed in the middle of the night. ” According to one 
tradition the Prophet said, “People who have once been gu ided go not 
astray except they become afflicted with disputation. He then read 
from the Qur’an the following verse: “They put this forth to thee only 
in the spirit of dispute. Yea, they are a contentious people”. 1 2 
According to a tradition the Quranic verse which begins with the 
words, “But they whose hearts are given to perversity, ” 3 signifies the 
people of disputation of whom God warned saying, “Beware of 
them!” 4 One of the forbears declared that at the end of time there will 
be a people who will be denied the opportunity to work but will be free 
to dispute. Another tradition says, “Ye are in the midst of a time 
wherein ye are blessed with work but a people will appear who will 
be given to disputation,” 5 while in the well-known tradition we read 
that “God abhors most those who are given to bitter enmity.” 6 
Another tradition declares that “no people are ever given to logic and 
debate without being lost to useful work.” 7 


1. lbn-Majah, Intro., 7:4. 

2. Surah XLIII, 58. 

3. Surah 01:5. 

4. Al-Jayahsi, No. 1432, 1433; al-Bukhari, Tafsiral-Qur-an, Al-‘lmran, 2: 
al-Tirmidhi, Tafir al-Qur'an, A1-* Imran, 1. 

5. Unidentified. 

6. Cf, al-Darimi , Intro., 23, 29, 35. 

7. Unidentified. 


SECTION IV 

On the reasons which induced men to persue the science of 
polemics and on revealing the evils of debate and disputation as 
well as stating the conditions which render them premissible . 

You should know that after the death of the Apostle of God, 
the caliphate was occupied by the orthodox and guided caliphs who 
were imams of righteousness, learned in the science of God, His 
essence and His attributes, versed in His statutes, and independent in 
handing down their legal opinions and decisions. In this they did not - 
seek the aid of jurisprudents except in very rare cases in which 
x>nsultation was indispensable. They devoted themselves to the 
cience of the hereafter and used to refer legal questions and all that 
jertams to human affairs in this world to one another and with their 
keenest effort, as the accounts of their lives reveal, they followed 
after God. 

When at their death, the caliphate passed on those who 
occupied it without either merit or independence in lefeal opinion and 
decisions, the caliphs were compelled to seek the aid of jurisprudents 
and to attach them to themselves on all occasions in order to consult 
with them on the manner of their judicial decisions. A few learned 
followers ( tabiun ), however, who continued to emulate the orthodox 
caliphs and persisted in conforming to the dictates of religion, and in 
following the way of righteous Fathers, were still living. Whenever 
they were sought for appointment as judges, they would flee, 
disdaining altogether such honour. Consequently the caliphs were 
compelled to (be insistent in their desire to appoint them as judges and 
to d el e g a te to them the power of government. Contemporaries were 
thus awakened to the glory of the learned men who, while they paid 
no attention to the caliphs and governors, were persistently soughtby 


100 


101 



The Book of Knowledge 


than. As a result these contemporaries turned with their efforts 
towards knowledge which they hoped to acquire in order to attain 
power and glory through the solicitation of governors. Thev bent 
themselves to the study of the science of legal opinions and offered 
their services to governors from whom they sought office and 
rewards. In this some failed while others met success, but those who 
were successful were not free from the obsequiousness of begging 
and the servility of indebtedness. Consequently the learned men, after 
having once been sought, have now become job seekers, and after 
having once been proud of their indifference to the sultans, having 
now become obsequious by waiting upon than. This is true of all 
except the few teamed men of religion whom God has blessed in every 
age. 

All that time people addressed themselves the most to the 
science of legal opinions and decisions because of the pressing need 
for it in governmental affairs. Later on, however, there emerged some 
celebrities and princes who had heard the pronouncements of people 
o® the elements of faith and enjoyed listening to their arguments, and 
consequently found themselves well disposed to debate and disputation 
in theology. Thus people pursued wholeheartedly the science of 
theology, composed many books on the subject in which they set forth 
the methods of argumentation and developed the principles of 
contradiction, claiming all the time that their sole purpose was to 
defend the religion of God, safeguard the Usage of His Prophet, and 
to uproot all innovators, just as the jurisprudents who preceded them 
claimed that they devoted themselves to the legal profession and took 
upon themselves the affairs of the Muslims simply out of pity for 
God’s creatures and for the sake of giving them counsel and advice. 

Subsequently, however, there appeared some distinguished 
men who deemed it improper to discourse on theology and start a 
series of debates therein because such a thing would lead to bloodshed 
and destruction. Instead they preferred to debate in jurisprudence and 
to point out the more important juridical points in the systems of al- 
Shafi’t and abu-Hanifah in particular. 


102 


The Book of Knowledge 


Consequently men discarded theology and theother disciplines 
of knowledge and pursued especially problems of disagreement 
between al-Shafi’t and abu-Hanifah, while to those between Malik, 
Sufyan al-Thawri, Ahmad ibn-Hanbal, and others, they paid little 
attention. Their purpose, they claimed, was to elicit the abstruse 
points of the law, determine the principles of the system, and prepare 
the bases of legal opinions and decisions. They composed many 
works on the subject and elicited many points, setting forth therein 
the different kinds of syllogisms of controversy and enumerating the 
various works that pertain thereto. Furthermore they still continue to 
compose at this present time; as to the future, however, we do not 
know what God has ordained. 

This, then, is what induced men to take up nothing but 
controversies and debate. If, however, the rulers of this world had 
favoured another imam or another science, men would have done the 
same and would have persisted in saying that they were employed in 
the science of religion and that they had no other aim than that of 
drawing near to God, the Lord of the Universe. 

Determining the ambiguity which exists in likening 
These debates to the consultations of the 
companions And the Councils of the fathers. 

You should know that those who liken their debates to the 
consultations of the Companions cajole men by saying that their aim 
in those debates is to search after the truth in order that it may become 
apparent, especially because the truth is much desired and any co- 
operation in examining truth and the exchange of views therein is 
both helpful and telling. Furthermore, such was the custom of the 
Companions in their consultations, as for example, the time when 
they held a consultation on the case of the grandfather and the 
brothers,' the penality for drinking wine , 2 the obligation on the imam 

1 . al-Bukhari, Fara'id, 9: al-Darimi, Fara'id, 1 1 . 

2. C/ al-Bukhari, Hudud, 1-4; al-Darimi, Hudud, 9. 


103 


The Book of Knowledge 


to pay an indemnity when he commits a mistake in his interpretation 
as has.been reported concerning the woman who had an abortion 
because of the fear of ‘Umar, 1 and several cases of inheritance, as 
well as what has been reported on the authority of al-Shafi-i, Ahmad 
ibn-Hanbal. Muhammad ibn-al-Hasan al-Shaybani, 2 Malik, abu- 
Yusuf and other learned men besides. You will understand this 
ambiguity between debate and consultation when I relate to you the 
following, namely, that co-operation in the search after truth is apart 
of religion but has eight distinguishing features and conditions. 
These are: 

1 Whereas debate as a means of searching after the truth 

is one of thefard kifayah duties, no one who has not yet fulfilled his 
fard 'ayn duties should take it up. Thus whoever has a fard ‘oynduty 
to fulfil, but addresses himself to the fulfilment of a fard kifayah 
instead, claiming that he seeks thereby the truth, is a liar; he is like 
the person who neglects prayer and traffics in weaving and tailoring 
saying that his purpose is to cover the nakedness of him who prays 
naked because he finds no clothes. Such a thing may occur and is 
quite possible just as the occurrence of the rare cases which are the 
subject of research in those debates is possible. Those who spend 
their time in debate neglect several duties which are, by general 
agreement ,fard ayn duties. Similarly, anyone who has been expected 
to return a deposit to its owner at once, but, instead of so doing, seeks 
refuge in prayer which is the worthiest of all obligations before God, 
transgresses because it is not enough that a person be obedient and 
his works constitute acts of service unless he observes therein the 
rules of time, condition and sequence. 

2. Debate as a means of searching after the truth is 
justified provided the doer is not confronted with a more important 
fard kifayah duty. 

Thus whoever finds an important obligation waiting for him 
and turns to perform something else, transgresses. In fact he is like 

1 . Cf. al-Bukhari, Diyat. 24-25. 

2. A.H. 189/A.D. 804-5; see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. D, pp. 2278. 


The Book of Knowledge 


a person who comes upon a group of people and finds them, having 
been neglected, about to die of thirst, but instead cf saving them by 
giving them water to drink, buckles down to study the art of bleeding, 
claiming that it is a fard kifayah and that unless the town had a 
bleeder the people will perish. On being told that a number ofbleeders 
already exist within his region and, therefore, there is no need for his 
services he insists that notwithstanding all this, bleeding remains a 
fard kifayah. Likewise, he who does this and neglects to give his 
attention to the calamity' which has befallen a group of thirsty 
Muslims is like the person who devotes his time to debate while 
several fard kifayah duties remain neglected in the town. Thus 
several have taken up the profession of law ifatwa ) while a number 
of obligatory duties remain neglected in every town and no jurisprudent 
ever pays anv attention to them. More specifically let me single out 
medicine in which there is not, in almost all the land, a Muslim 
physician whose word could be legally accepted in important matters . 
Nevertheless not one of the jurisprudents has taken up medicine. The 
same is true of the Muslim obligation to enjoin what is just and to 
forbid what is evil' which is a fard kifayah duty. 

A debater might perhaps be arguing in the midst of a hall 
draped with silk and among men apparelled with it, but would say 
nothing about it and instead w ould debate concerning a hypothetical 
case which might never come to pass, even if it should occur there 
would be several jurisprudents ready to attend to it. All this time he 
claims that he desires to come nearer to God through performing the 
fard kifayah duties. It was related by Anas that the Apostle of God 
was once asked, “When will the Muslim obligation of enjoining what 
is just and forbidding what is evil be neglected? ’ To which he replied, • 
“When the best among you take to hypocrisy and the wicked, to 
adultery; when government shall pass to the hands of the least 
deserving among you and knowledge to those who are corrupt. 

3. The third condition which justifies debate is that the 
debater should have the ability and right to form an opinion ofhis own 
(mujlahid). and should be one who can give decisions on his own 

t. Cf. Surah IX: 72 


104 


105 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


responsibility without being bound be the opinions of either al- 
Shafi ‘ i or abu-Hanifah or any other imam, so that whenever he would 
find that the school of ftbu-Hanifah is right on a particular point he 
would hand down his opinion accordingly, just as the Companions 
and the imams used to do, and would ignore what the Shafi ’ ite school 
holds on the subject. On the other hand, he who lacks the right and 
the ability of independent interpretation (ijtihad), as is the case with 
all contemporaries, but would hand down his opinions on the 
authority of his imam, would not be able to reject the stand of another 
even though he should discover its weakness. Of what use to him 
there is debate when his system is well-known and his opinions are 
bound to confoimto it? And whenever a doubtful point confronts him 
he would be compelled to say that the founder of his school might 
have an answer as he himself was not independent in interpreting the 
sources of the law. It would have been more fitting for him if his 
discussions were on points which lend themselves to two opinions, 
for then he might hand down his opinion in favour of the one and 
against the other and become thereby more and more disposed to one 
view and opposed to the other. Yet debates are not confined to this 
type of two-sided questions; often these are ignored in favour of cases 
in which the points of controversy have been fully discussed and 
decided. 

4 . The fourth condition which justifies debate is that there 

should be none except on actual cases or cases likely to be so. Thus 
the Companions held consultations only as questions arose or were 
likely to arise, as for example questions of inheritance. We do not, 
however, see debaters concerning themselves with the criticism of 
cases in which the handing of opinions has caused widespread 
tribulations. Rather they seek the spectacular cases which attract 
attention and consequently, no matter what the nature of the case may 
be, discussion of the issue becomes widespread. They may even 
ignore cases of frequent occurrence saying that they are reported 
cases or rare events which are not spectacular. That the aim of a 
debate should be the truth is nothing short of a miracle. They would 
also drop a case because it has been reported although the way to 


truth is through such reports; or they might drop it because it was not 
spectacular and would lend itselfto little discussion. Truth, however, 
aims at reducing debate and arriving at conclusions concisely and not 
flatulently. 

5. The fifth condition which justifies debate is that it 
should be held in private in preference to public meeting in the 
presence of celebrities and sultans, because privacy is more conducive 
to understanding and its atmosphere more suitable to clear thinking. 
Public meetings encourage hypocrisy and make it imperative for the 
individual to defend himself whether he is right or wrong. It is very' 
well-known that these public meetings and assemblies are not 
promoted by their devotees for the sake of God. One of them may be 
alone with his companion for a long period of time but will not even 
talk to him because there is no audience to applaud his rhetoric. He 
may at times try to start a discussion but for the same reason gets no 
response But no sooner someone makes his appearance or a group 
assembles, than he will try his utmost to provoke a controversy and 
then monopolize the discussion. 

6. The sixth condition which justifies debate is that the 
debater should seek thereby the truth in the same spirit as that of the 
person who is searching for a lost object; he does not mind whether 
the object is found by himself or by his aides, regards his companion 
a friend not an adversary, and thanks him whenever he points out a 
mistake to him and reveals to him the truth. Thus if he pursues one 
way in his search for his lost object and his companion shows him 
another and better way he will not criticise him but rather will thank 
and honour him and rejoice with him. Such were the consultations of 
the Companions that once upon a time, when ‘Umar was addressing 
an assembly, a certain woman interrupted him and pointed out to him 
his mistake. Thereupon he said, ‘‘A woman hath hit the mark while 
a man hath missed;’ At another time a certain man asked ‘Ali a 
question and, on receiving an answer, disagreed with him say ing that 
it was different; to which Ali replied: ‘Thou art right while I am 
wrong, Exalted overall istheOmniscientGod’ On another occasion, 
abu-Musa, al-Ash'ari. then the governor of al-Kufah. was asked 


106 


107 



The Book of Knowledge 


concerning the fate of a man who had died fighting for God and 
replied that he was in Paradise. Thereupon ibn-Masud contradicted 
abu-Musa and said that, in his opinion, the man would be in Paradise 
if, at his death, he has been truly sincere. Abu-Musa, concurring with 
the opinion of ibn-Mas‘ud said, “What he hath said is the truth. Ask 
not my opinion when in your midst you have such an authority.” 
Such should be the fairness and justice of a seeker after truth. Should 
such a thing be mentioned nowadays to the most insignificant 
jurisprudent, he would deny it and declare it to be improbable. He 
would also say that there was no need at all for the explicit mention 
of sincerity since everyone knows that it was a necessary requ i rement . 

Compare, therefore, the Companions with contemporary 
debaters, how the latter become embarrassed and ashamed whenever 
the truth is determined by an adversary', and how they exert their 
utmost efforts trying to deny the adversary his credit, malign those 
who refute their opinions, and finally liken themselves to the 
Companions in respect of co-operation in determining the truth. 

7 . The seventh condition which justifies debate is that the 

debater should not prevent his adversary from relinquishing one 
argument in favour of another and one illustration in favour of a 
second, as the debates of the Fathers were thus carried. The debater, 
also, should remove from his argument all the unorthodox subtitles 
of dialectics whether they are relevant or irrelevant. Thus hs should 
not, for example, say that he was under no obligation to bring this up 
or that such and such a statement was contradictory to your first 
assertion and, therefore, unacceptable because going back to truth is 
in itself a refutation of error and should be accepted as an argument. 
You also notice how all assemblies are spent in defences and debates, 
so much so that a debater would deduce a principle from all alleged 
causes, and when asked what proof he had that his conclusion was 
explained by that cause, he would say that that was what he had found 
and would tell his critic, “If you should find anything clearer and 
better, produce it so that I might examine it.” The objecting critic 
would then insist that such a thing has several meanings which he 
himself has always known but need not go through them while the 

108 


The Book of Knowledge 


debater would demand that they be discussed; but the critic would 
persist in his refusal. The debating assemblies are taken up by such 
questions while the poor debater does not realize that his saying that 
he neither knows nor remembers, and that he has no need for this or 
for that, is a lie against the law, because if he asserts that which he 
does not know simply to incapacitate his adversary he would be a 
wicked liar disobedient to God, any by his claim to knowledge he does . 
not possess he would expose himself to the wrath of God. He would 
also have sinned even if his claims were true because he had 
concealed what he had known of the law. His brother Muslim had 
asked him in order to have things explained and examined, so that if 
he were right he would abide there by but if he were wrong he would 
have his friend point out his mistake for him and lead hm from the 
darkness of ignorance to the bright light of knowledge. No one will 
disagree that it is obligatory on the person to reveal whatever 
knowledge he may possess of the sciences of religion whenever he is 
asked about it. The meaning of his words, “I am under no obligation 
to bring this up,” is that in the rules of dialectics, which have been 
developed according to the principles of human curiosity and interest 
in the methods of deception and battling with words, he was under 
no obligation to admit anything unless it was obligatory' by law. By 
his refusal to admit in the course of his argument a point which has 
been brought up and w hich he know's is true he becomes a liar and a 
villain. 

Examine the consultations of the Companions and the 
negotiations of the Fathers. Have you ever heard of anything like this 
in them, or have you ever seen anybody who had been prevented from 
relinquishing one argument in favour of another and one illustration 
in favour of a second, and from citing as proof an event in the life of 
one of the Companions after having drawn an analogy, or quoting a 
Quranic verse having related a tradition? On the contrary all their 
debates were carried on in this manner: they used to set forth and 
examine everything that occurred to them just as it occurred. 

8 . The eighth condition which justifies debate is that one 

should only debate with those from whom he expects to learn 

109 



The Book of Knowledge 


something, people who arrive at their knowledge independently. 
Usually, however, men nowadays avoid entering into a debate with 
intellectual giants and celebrities for fear that their adversaries 
should determine the truth. They would rather debate with their 
inferiors in the hope of confounding them with falsehood. 

Many other minute conditions, which make debate justifiable, 
exist besides those already mentioned; but in those eight conditions 
you will find how to distinguish between those who debate for the 
cause of God and those who debate for some other purpose. But in 
general you should know that he who does not struggle against and 
debate Satan while his heart is subject to his most virulent enemy, the 
Devil, by whom he is being continually dragged to his doom, but does 
instead debate with men in cases wherein the mujtahid is right, or 
shares with him who is right his reward, the same is a laughing stock 
of Satan and ah example for the sincere. Thus Satan rejoices when 
he throws him ihto the darknesses of evil which we shall now 
enumerate and discuss. 

On the evils of debate and the character 

DESTROYING INFLUENCES RESULTING THEREFROM 

You should know and be sure that debates which are designed 
for the purpose of overcoming and silencing an opponent as well as 
for displaying one’s excellence and honour, bragging before men, 
boasting, and being contradictory, or for the sake of winning popular 
favour, are the source of all traits which are blameworthy before God 
and praiseworthy before His enemy, the Devil. Its relation to the 
secret sins of pride, conceit, jealousy, envy, self-justification, love of 
power, and others is like the relation of drinking to the sins of the flesh 
such as fornication, foul play, and murder. Just as the person who has 
been given the opportunity to choose between drinking and the other 
sins, deemed the former harmless and took to it only to be led by his 
drunkenness into committing all the other sins, so is he who 
succumbs to the lures of overcoming and silencing opponents in 
debate, and falls victim to the urge for power and boasting; these 
things have led him to conceal all wickedness in his bosom and stirred 


The Book of Knowledge 


in him all blameworthy traits. Proofs of the blameworthiness of all 
these will be discussed in the Quarter on the Destructive Matters in 
Life although we shall now allude to the major evils which are 
enkindled by debate. Of these we may enumerate the following.” 

One is envy: The Prophet said, “As fire consumes wood so 
does envy consume good deeds .” 1 The debater persists in envy 
because at times he overcomes his adversary' and other times he 
himself is overcome; at times his words are praised and at other times 
those of his opponent are applauded; and as long as there remains in 
all the world one known among men for his versatile knowledge and 
regarded by them more learned than the debater and endowed with 
keener insight, the debater will inevitably envy him and wish that the 
favours and admiration which that man enjoys might accrue to him 
instead. 

Envy is a consuming fire; its victim is subject to torment in this 
world while in the world to come his torture will be more intense and 
painful. Forthis reason ibn-‘ Abbas said, “Take knowledge wherever 
ye may find it, but accept not the opinion of one jurisprudent 
concerning another because they are as jealous of one another as the 
bulls in the cattle-yard.” 

Another is pride and haughtiness: The Prophet said, “He who 
exalteth himself is humbled by God, and he who humbleth himself is 
exalted by God .” 2 Said he again quoting God, “Pride is my mantle 
and grandeur, yea it is my cloak. I shall smite anyone who would 
contest my sole right to them .” 3 

The debater persists in exalting himself above his equals and 
peers and in claiming for himself a station higher than his worth to 
the extent that he and his colleagues fight over their seats in assembly 
halls and boast about the degree of their elevation or lowliness as well 
as their proximity to, or remoteness from the central seat. They would 
fight as to who should lead the way in narrow streets. Often the 

1 . Abu-Dawud, Adab, 44; ibn-Majah , Zuhd, 22:3. 

2. Cf ibn-Majah y Zuhd, 16:3; Matt, 22:12; Luke 14: 1 1, 18:14. 

3. See ibn-Majahy Zuhd, 16:2. 


110 


111 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


foolish, deceitful, and insolent among them justify themselves on the 
ground that they are thereby maintaining the dignity of knowledge 
because the believers has been charged not to object himself. They 
thus consider humility, which God and his prophets commended, 
abasement, and regard pride, which is reprehensible to .God, the 
dignitv of religion. In other words they have altered the signification 
of these terms for the confusion of people as they have altered the 
signification of other terms such as wisdom, knowledge and the like. 

Another is rancour from which a debater is hardly ever free. 
The Prophet said, "The believer is free from rancour.” Several more 
traditions have been related in condemnation of rancour and they are 
well-known. Yet we do not know of a debater who, is capable of 
entertaining no rancour against anyone who would nod his head in 
approval of the words of his adversary, or who when the latter pauses 
in the midst of a sentence, would politely wait for him. On the 
contrary he would, whenever he is confronted with such a situation, 
entertain and foster rancour in his heart. He may attempt to restrain 
himself hoping thereby to disguise his feelings; but, in most cases, he 
fails as his feelings invariably reveal themselves. How can he refrain 
from rancour when it is inconceivable that all the audience should 
unite in favouring his argument and approve all his conclusions and 
deductions? Furthermore should his opponent show the least sign of 
inconsideration about what he was saying, he would entertain for him 
in his heart a hatred that would last throughout his life. 

Another is backbiting which was likened by God to the eating 
of carrion.' 

The debater persists in “eating carrion” and is continually 
referring to the w'ords of his opponent and traducing him. Because he 
endeavours to be right in what he says about his opponent, he 
inevitably cites only what shows the weaknesses of his opponent’s 
argument and the flaws in his excellences. Of such is traducing and 
backbiting, while lying is sheer calumny. 

The debater, moreover, cannot keep his tongue from attacking 


the honour of anyone who turns away from him and listens to his 
opponent. He would even ascribe to him ignorance, foolishness, lack 
of understanding, and stupidity. 

Another is self-justification; God said, “Assert not then your 
own purity. He best knoweth who feareth Him .” 1 A certain wise man 
was once asked, “What truth is reprehensible?” He replied, “A 
man’s praising himself [even though it be justified].” A debater is 
never free from praising himself and boasting of his power, triumph, 
and excellence over his peers. In the course of a debate he would 
repeatedly say, “I am fully aw'are of all such things, and I am 
versatile in science, of independent judgment on question of law, and 
well-versed in the know ledge of tradition,” and many other assertions 
besides with which he would sing his own praise, sometimes out of 
sheer arrogance and at other times out of the need to render his words 
convincing. It is also well-known that arrogance and self-praise are 
by law and reason condemned. 

Another is spying and prying into the private affairs of men. 
God said, “Pry not. ” 2 The debater always seeks to uncover the errors 
of his peers and continually pries into the private affairs of his 
opponents. He would, when informed of the arrival in town of another 
debater, seek someone who could reveal the inside story of the man 
and would by means of a questionnaire attempt to bare his vices in 
order to expose and disgrace him whenever the need should arise. He 
even would inquire about the affairs of his early life and blemishes 
of his body in the hope of discovering some defect or disfigurement 
such as scalp pustule and the like. Should he fear' defeat at the hands 
of his opponent, he would, in the course of the debate, allude to these 
blemishes, especially if his opponent should remain firm and stand 
his ground, and would not refrain from being outspoken if he were 
given to insolence and scorn Both of these practices are regarded as 
clever ways of repelling the attacks of an opponent, as should be seen 
by the accounts of the debates of some of the illustrious and 
celebrated debaters. 


1. Surah LIE: 33 2. Surah XLIX: 12. 


I. 


Cf Sutxih XLIX: 12. 


112 


9 


113 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Another is to rejoice at the injury of others and feel depressed 
when they are glad. Anyone who does not desire for his brother 
Muslim what he desires for himself is far removed from the way of 
believers 1 Thus he who prides himself by parading his excellence is 
inevitably pleased at the injury of his peers and equals who vie with 

himfor glory. The hatred which exists between them lslike that which 

exists between fellow-wives. Just as the one wife would tremble and 
turn pale at the sight ofher fellow-wife so would a debater at the sight 
of another , his colour would change and his mind become perplexed 
as though he had seen a mighty devil or a hungry lion . How unlike the 
companionship and friendliness which used to exist between the 
learned men of religion whenever they met is this, and how unlike the 
brotherhood, the co-operation, and the mutual sharing which were 
characteristic of them under fair and adverse conditions alike Thus 
al-Shafi‘i said, “Among the virtuous and wise, knowledge is like a 
bond of blood relationship.” 1 cannot, therefore, understand how 
some men, among whom knowledge has engendered a deep-rooted 
enmity, have followed his rite. Or can you ever imagine any spirit ot 
friendliness prevailing among diem when they are concerned with 
achievingtriumph andboasting of it? How unlikely! It is bad enough 
that such an evil fastens on you the traits of the deceitful and robs you 

of those of the believers and devout. 

Another is deception, the evidence of whose blameworthiness 
is well known and need not be enumerated. Debaters are compelled 
to deception because when they meet their opponents, friends, or 
followers, they find it necessary to endear themselves to them by 
saying nice things which they do not mean, by feigning to have been 
anxious to meet them, and by pretending to be impressed by their 
station and position, while everyone present as well as the speakers 
and those to whom they have spoken to, know that the whole thing is 
untrue, false, fraudulent, and wicked. They profess their love with 
their tongues while their hearts seethe with hate. From it all we seek 
refuge in God. 


1 Cf. al-Bukhari, bnan, 6 


The Prophet also said, “When people take to knowledge and 
ignore works, when they profess love to one another with their tongue 
and nurse hatred in their hearts, and when they sever the ties of 
relationship which bind them, God will visit His wrath upon them and 
curse them. He will render their tongues mute and their eyes blind. 
The truth of this tradition, which was related by al-Hasan, has been 
verified as these conditions which it predicts have been witnessed and 
seen. 

Another is to resist truth and detest it and to persist in disputing 
it so much so that the most hateful thing to a debater is to see the truth 
revealed by his opponent; no matter what it may be, he would do his 
best to refute and deny it and would exert his utmost in deception, 
trickery and fraud in order to disprove his adversary until contention 
becomes in him a second nature. He is thus unable to hear anything 
without immediately expressing his objection to it. This habit of his 
would even drive him to dispute the truths of the Qur’an and the 
words of tradition and would cause hm to cite the one in contradiction 
of the other. Furthermore wrangling even in opposing wrong is 
prohibited since the Prophet called men to abjure it although they are 
right in their contention. He thus said, “Whoever was in error and 
should abjure wrangling, to him God would build a dwelling in the 
confines of Paradise; while whoever was in the right and should 
abjure wiungling, to him God would prepare a habitation in the heart 
of Paradise.”' God has al a regarded as equal those who devise lies 
again st God and those who call the truth a lie. He said, “But who 
acteth more wrongfully than he who deviseth a lie against God, or 
calls the truth when ithathcc. netohim, a lie?” 2 and again, ‘ Andwho 
acteth more wrongfully than he who lieth against God and treateththe 
truth when it comes tc him as a lie.” 3 

Another is hypocrisy and flattering people in an effort to win 
their favour and mislead diem. Hypocrisy is that virulent disease 
which, as will be discussed in the Book on Hypocrisy, 4 leads to the 

1 Cf ibn-Majah Intro., 7: 7. 2. Surah XXIX: 68 

3. Surah XXXX: 33 

4. See the Quarter on the Destructive Matters of Life, Bk. VIII. 


114 


115 


The Book of Knowledge 


gravest of the major sins. The debater wants nothing but to put 
himself forward before people, and to gan their approval and praise. 

These ten traits are among the greatest secret sins. Others, 
who lack restraint may engage in .controversies leading to the 
exchange of blows, kicking, boxing, tearing garments, plucking 
beards, cursing parents, denouncing teachers, and outright slander. 
Such people, however, are not considered respectable human beings 
The prominent and sober among them do not go beyond the preceding 
ten traits. One may be free of this or that trait with regard to his 
inferiors or superiors, whatever the case may be, or with regards to 
people outside his community or his sphere of work. Yet in his 
towards his peers, who are equal to him in position, the 
debater is guilty of all these traits. Each of these ten traits may give 
rise to ten other vices which we shall neither discuss nor explain at 
the present time. They include snobbishness, anger, hatred, greed, the 
desire to seek money and power in order to attain triumph, boasting, 
gaiety, arrogance, exalting the wealthy and those in authorin' as well 
as frequenting their places and partaking of tfieir unlawful riches, 
parading with horses, state-coaches, and outlawed garments, showing 
contempt to people by being vain and ostentatious, meddling in the 
affairs of others, talkativeness, the disappearance of awe, fear, and 
mercy from the heart, absent-mindedness to an extent that the 
worshipper would no longer be aware of what he had prayed, or read, 
or who had communed with him during his prayer, nor, despite the 
fact that he had spent his life in the study of those sciences which aid 
in debate but are useless in the hereafter, such as the embellishment 
of diction and the knowledge of singular anecdotes, would he be able 
to experience any feeling of humility in his heart. 

These traits are common to all debaters although they have 
them in varying degrees each according to his own station. But 
everyone, even the most religious and the wisest among them, is 
sub ject to several of then. Everyone, too, hopes to conceal them and, 
bv self-mortification, to free himself therefrom. 

You should, moreover, know that these vices characterize 


116 


The Book of Knowledge 


those employed in admonition and warning if their purpose is to be 
recognized and establish for themselves prestige, or to obtain wealth 
and position. They also characterize those who are working in the 
science of religion and legal opinions if they ever hope to secure a 
position in the department of justice or become trustees of mortmain 
properties ( awqaf) or to excel their peers. In general, these vices 
characterize everyone who, through knowledge, seeks other than the 
reward of God in the hereafter. 

Knowledge, therefore, would either doom its possessor to 
eternal destruction or lead him to life everlasting. For that reason the 
Prophet said, “The most severely punished of all men on the day of 
resurrection will be the learned man whom God has not blessed with 
His knowledge.” On the contrary how much better it would have 
been if he had come out at least even. This, however, is very unlikely 
because the dangers of knowledge are great, for he who seeks it seeks 
the everlasting kingdom and the eternal bliss which he will either 
attain or else be doomed to perdition. The seeker after knowledge is 
like him who seeks power in this world: if he does not succeed in 
amassing a fortune he cannot hope to be spared the humiliation of 
poverty. On the contrary, he will continue to live in the midst of the 
worst conditions . To say that in encouraging debate lies an advantage, 
namely, that of inducing people to seek knowledge since without 
ambition for power and the rivalry which it provokes all branches of 
knowledge would have vanished, is true in one respect but otherwise 
useless. Thus had it been for their expectation of playing at the ball 
and mallet 1 and with birds , 2 the school would not have been attractive 
to the boys. But this does not mean that the reasons for the school s 
popularity are praiseworthy. Similarly in the case of ambition for 
power as the reason for the preservation of knowledge: it does not 
mean that the ambitious one is saved. On the contrary he is one of 
those whom the Prophet described when he said, “Verily God will 
establish this faith through men who have no faith .” 3 And again, 

1 . ATKurah w-al-Sawlajan. 

2. Unidentified game. 

3. Hikyat al-Awliya y Vol. D, p. 358. 

4. Cf al-Bukhari , Maghazi, 40:7; Qadar,5 


117 


The Book of Knowledge 


“Verily God will establish this faith through wicked men .” 1 The 
ambitious is personally doomed to destruction although, through 
him, others may be saved, especially if he should urge people to 
forsake the world and in so doing outwardly resemble the learned 
Fathers while inwardly he conceals his ambitions. He is, in this 
respect, like the candle which bums itself out in order that others may 
see: the good of others lies in his own destruction. On the other hand 
if he should urge people to cherish this world he would be like the fire 
which, besides consuming everything, bums itself out as well. 

The learned men are of three kind: First those who are 
outspoken in seeking this world and in their devotion to it they destroy 
both themselves and others. Second, those who call people to God in 
public and in private; they bring joy and gladness both to themselves 
and to those whom they call. Third, those who preach the hereafter, 
outwardly forsaking the world while inwardly seeking the approval 
of men and wordly prestige; they save others but destroy themselves. 

Examine therefore to which of these three categories you 
belong and to what end have you been preparing yourself, and do not 
think that God would accept anything of knowledge and work which 
has not been consecrated to Him. Any doubts which you may have 
in this regard will be dispelled by the contents of the Book on 
Hypocrisy, in factby all the contentsofthe Quarter on the Destructive 
Matters in Life . 2 


1 . Cf. al-Bukhari, Maghazi, 40: 7, Qadar, 5. 

2. See Vol. ID, Bk ID 


SECTION V 

On the Proprieties of the Student and the Teacher. 

The formal proprieties and duties of the student are many but 
may be classified under ten headings: 

The first duty of the student is to purify his soul from impure 
traits and blameworthy characteristics because knowledge is the 
worship of man’s heart as well as the prayer of his inmost self (sirr) 
and the oblation of his inward being before God. Just as prayer, 
which is the duty of the physical senses, is not fulfilled unless the 
physical body has been purified from excrements and impurities, so 
is the worship of the inward being as well as the reformation of the 
heart: they are not fulfilled through knowledge unless they first be 
cleansed from impurities and uncleanliness. Thus the Prophet said, 
“Religion has been built on cleanliness .” This is true physically and 
spiritually. God said, “Verily the polytheists are unclean ...” 1 as a 
reminder to the mind that purity and uncleanliness are not confined 
to the externals which are perceived by the senses . Thus the polytheist 
may be physically clean and immaculately dressed yet he is inwardly 
unclean, i.e., his inward being reeks with impurities. Uncleanltness 
is a word which represents that which is avoided and from which 
people desire to stay away. It is more important to avoid the 
impurities of the heart than to avoid physical impurities because, 
besides their abomination in this world, the impurities of the heart are 
fatal in the world to come. For this reason the Prophet said, “The 
angels do not enter into a house where there are dogs or images .” 2 The 
heart is the house of the angels, the place on which they descend and 


1 . Surah IX: 28. 

2. Al-Tirmidhi , Adab, 44: al-Darimi , lsti,dhan, 34. 


118 


119 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


in which they abide, while bad traits like anger, lust, rancour, envy, 
pride, conceit and the like are barking dogs. How then could the 
angels enter the heart when it u crowded with dogs? Besides, the light 
of knowledge is not made to shine upon the heart of man except 
through the instrumentality of the angels, and it is not possible for 
any man to have any communication with God except through 
revelation or through a veil or through a messenger whom God sends 
and instructs to declare His will. Similarly whatever knowledge is 
sent by the grace of God to the human heart is transmitted by the 
angels who have been entrusted ( muwaooolun )' with this 
responsibility. They are the angels who have been made holy, pure, 
and free from all blameworthy traits. They attend to no one but the 
good, and with what they possess of the mercy of God they reform 
no one but the pure. 

I do not say that, in the above quoted tradition, the word house 
itself means heart and the word dog, anger as well as other blameworthy 
traits; but I do say that it is a suggestion. Thus there is a difference 
between ignoring the literal meaning of words in favour of an esoteric 
interpretation on the one hand and incidentally pointing out an 
esoteric significance while affirming the literal meaning on the other 
hand. This subtle point is exactly what distinguishes the Batinites 
from the true believers. This is the method of suggestion, which is the 
way of die learned and the righteous. For suggestion means that what 
has already been mentioned should also represent something else and 
consequently attention should be paid to both. Thus the wise man 
may witness a calamity befall someone besides himself and the 
calamity would serve as a warning to him, in that it would wake him 
up to die fact that he too is subject to calamities and that time is full 
of vicissitudes. Thus to turn one’s attention from the examination of 
the affairs of others to those of his own and from those of his own to 
the examination of the nature of the things for the sake of learning is 
a praiseworthy practice. Proceed, therefore, from the consideration 
of the house built by God and from the consideration of the dog which 
has been pronounced blameworthy, not for its physical appearance 

l . See Al-Qazwini ‘ Aja-ib , pp. 62-3. 


but for its inherent beastly characteristics and uncieanliness, to that 
of the animal spirit which is bestiality. 

You should know, too, that he whose heart is saturated with 
anger, greed, indulgence, and readiness to slander people is actually 
a beast although he appears in the form of a human being. He who 
has keen insight regards the real meaning of things and not their form. 
In this world forms obscure the realities which lie within them, but 
in the hereafter forms will conform to realities and the latter will 
prevail. Forthis reason every individual willbe resurrected according 
to his own spiritual reality; the slanderer will be resurrected in the 
form of a vicious dog; the greedy, a wild wolf, the haughty, a tiger, 
and the ambitious, a lion. T raditions have attested to this and the men 
of insight and discerning have testified to it. 

You migii say that many students of bad character have 
sought and acquired the knowledge of the sciences. That may be so, 
but how far they are from real knowledge which is useful in the 
hereafter and which insures happiness! Characteristic of that true 
knowledge is that even a rudimentary grasp of it would show that sin 
is a fatal and destructive poison. And have you ever seen anyone take 
anything which he knew to be fatally poisonous? As to what you hear 
from the sophists it is nothing but [spurious] traditions which they 
fabricate and repeat — it is no science at all. Ibn-Mas‘ud said, 
“Knowledge is not the prolific retention of traditions but a light 
which floods the heart .” 1 Others, having in mind the words of God, 
“Such only of His servants as are possessed of knowledge fear 
God .” 2 hold that knowledge is the fear of God. This verse evidently 
alludes to the choicest fruit of knowledge; and for that reason one of 
the scholars said that the meaning of the words, We sought 
knowledge for other purposes than the glory of God but failed to 
grasp it and it remained the attribute of God alone,” is that knowledge 
has resisted our efforts to grasp it and consequently its truth was not 
revealed to us; all we acquired was its words and terms. 


1 . Cf Hayat al-Awliya\ Vol. I, p 131 

2. Surah XXXV: 25. 


120 


121 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Shouldyou say that several well-learned men and jurisprudents, 
while characterised by blameworthy traits from which they never 
purified themselves, have excelled in the principles of law and 
applied jurisprudence and have been considered authorities thereon, 
my answer would be that if you had known therelative ranks of the 
sciences as well as the value of the science of the hereafter, you would 
have realized that the sciencesto which they have addressed themselves 

are of little avail as knowledge but are of use merely as works 
provided they are sought as means with which to draw near to God. 
This last point has already been mentioned and will again be 
discussed. 

The second duty of the student is to reduce to a minimum his 
ties with the affairs of the world and leave his kin and country because 
such ties occupy one’s time and divert one’s attention. Furthermore 
God has not given man two hearts and the more the mind divides its 
attention among several things the less able it is to comprehend the 
truth. For this reason it has been said, “Knowledge will surrender 
nothing to man unless man surrenders his all to it.” Even when you 
devote vourself completely to it, you cannot be sure that you will 
attain any of it. This mind which divides its attention among different 
things is like a stream the water of which flows in several directions 
only to be absorbed in part by the earth and in part by the air with the 
result that nothing is left for irrigation of planted lands. 

The third duty of the student is that he should neither scorn 
knowledge nor exalt himself over the teacher, but rather entrust to 
him the conduct of his affairs and submit to his advice just as the 
simple patient would submit to a sympathetic and clever physician. 
He should humble himself before his teacher and through his service 
seek reward and honour. It was related by al-Sha‘bi‘ that once upon 
a time as Zayd ibn-Thabit : was leaving a funeral service at which he 
had just officiated, his mule was brought to him and as he was about 

1. Abu-'Amr ‘Amir ibn-Sharahil (between AH. 103 and 105 A.D.721 and 

724). See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, pp 436-8. 

2. The scribe of the Prophet (ca. AH. 54/A.D. 674). See Tahdhib al-Asma 

pp. 259-60. 


to mount it ibn-‘ Abbas rushed and held the stirrup for him. Thereupon 
Zayd said, “Oh! No! Bother not thyself O cousin of the Apostle of 
God ” Ibn-‘ Abbas replied, “Thus have we been charged to treat the 
learned and the illustrious.” To which Zayd, bending over and 
kissing ibn-‘ Abbas’ hand, replied, “Thus have we been charged to 
venerate the household of our Prophet.” The Prophet also said. It 
is not the habit of the believer to flatter anyone except when he is 
seeking knowledge.” Therefore the seeker after knowledge should 
not lord it over his teacher. One manifestation of such a pride is the 
pupil’s reluctance to heed the advice of anyone except the popular 
and well-known teachers. This is foolishness itself because 
knowledge is the wav to salvation and happiness. Besides anyone 
who is seeking an escape from the claws of a threatening wild lion 
does not mind, as long as he is saved, whether he is led to safety by 
a well-known celebrity or by an obscure person. The tortures which 
the flames of hell fire inflict upon those who are ignorant of God are 
greater than any which the lions of the jungle are capable of inflicting. 
Wisdom, therefore, is the aim of every believer; he siezes it wherever 
he finds it, and is under obligation to anyone who imparts it to him, 
no matter who the person may be. For this reason it has been said. 

“Knowledge humbleth the haughty youth. 

As the flood washeth away the hill.” 

Thus knowledge is not attained except through humility and 

harkening. Godsaid, “Lo! Herein is warning for him who hath a heart 

or harkeneth with his ear while he himself is an eye-witness By 
“him who hath a heart” is meant the person who is prepared and 
capable of understanding knowledge but would fail to do so unless 
he would open his ears and heart and would attentively, humbly, 
thankfully, gladly, and gratefully receive whatever he is tokf Let, 
therefore! the pupil be to his teacher like the soft soil which has 
received heavy rains and completely absorbed them. Whatever the 
teacher should recommend to the pupil the latter should follow, 
putting aside his own opinion since his teacher’s faults are more 


1 . Surah L: 36. 


122 


123 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


useful to him than his own right judgment because experience would 
reveal details which might be strange but are nevertheless very 
useful. Often a physician may treat a patient suffering from fever 
with warm applications and drinks in order to increase his resistance 
to withstand the shock which results from the administration of the 
medicine. Because of his ignorance 1 the uninformed would be 
amazed by this treatment. God pointed out the possibility of such a 
thing through the story of al-Khidr 2 3 and Moses where al-Khidr, 
addressing Moses, said, “Verily thou canst not have patience with 
me, how canst thou be patient in matters the meaning of which thou 
comprehendest not?” He then allowed Moses to follow him on 
condition that the latter would maintain silence and ask no questions, 
and said, “If you follow me, ask me not of aught until I have given 
thee an account thereof’. Nevertheless Moses did not wait and 
persisted to query al-Khidr with the result that they had to part 
company. In short, be sure that every pupil, who would hold fast to 
his own opinion and choice in defiance to those of his teacher, is 
doomed to disappointment and failure. 

Should you also come forth with the assertion that, whereas 
God said, “Ask ye the people who are warned by Scriptures if ye 
know not ,” 4 asking questions was ordained by God, you should 
remember that this is only so in whatever the teacher allows. On the 
other hand to ask about things which you are not yet competent to 
understand is blameworthy, and it was for this reason that al-Khidr 
had forbidden Moses to ask any questions. In other words do not ask 
questions out of the proper time and season; the teacher is better 
informed than you are as to things you are capable of understanding 
and as to the appropriate time for making them known. Similarly 


1 . Also al-Khidr, see Surah XVIII: '59-81; al-Tha alibi, Qisas al-Anbiya ' 
(Cairo, 1297), pp 207-220; al-Zamakhshari, al-Kashshaf; al-Tabari, 
Jami ' al-Bayan ft Tafsiar al-Qur' an. See also A. J. Wensnick, art. “Al- 
Khidr” in Encyclopaedia of Islam. 

2. Surah XVIII: 67-7. 

3. Ibid., 69. 

4. Surah XVI: 45; XXI. 7. 

124 


unless, in anyone of the successive planes, the appropriate time of 
revelation is come, the time for its expectation does not arrive . 1 

‘ Ali said, “Among the obligations which you owe the learned 
man are: not to pester him with too many questions nor expect him 
to reply to all your inquiries; not to be importunate when he seems 
lazy nor attempt to detain him when he starts to go away; and finally 
not to divulge his secrets nor to tell tales about other people in his 
presence. Furthermore do not seek to trap him; whenever he commits 
a mistake be ready to excuse him. In obedience to God it is your duty 
to respect and honour him as long as he himself continues to obey 
God. Remain standing in his presence and whenever he needs 
something be the first to wait on him.” 

The fourth duty is that the student should at first pay no 
attention to the numerous differences of opinion which exist among 
people, whether in the secular sciences or in the sciences of the 
hereafter, because they would confuse and perplex his mind, cool his 
enthusiasm and cause him to despair of ever comprehending or 
learning anything. Rather he should first master the one and only 
praiseworthy way which is satisfactory to his teacher and then attend 
to the other schools of thought and questionable ideas. He should be 
on the look out to see if his teacher is not capable of reaching 
independent opinions but is in the habit of repeating the opinions of 
the different schools and the comments which have been made 
concerning them, because the influence of such a teacher is more 
misleading than it is helpful. One blind is not fit to lead the blind and 
guide them . 2 Anyone of his description is still in the darkness of 
perplexity and the wilderness of ignorance. Furthermore isolating the 
novice against questionable ideas is like segregating the newly 
converted Muslim from the unbelievers; while selecting the 

1 . Mystics hold God reveals Himself in five planes: ( 1 ) the plane of the 
Essence, (2) the plane of the Attributes, (3) the plane of the Actions, (4) 
the plane of Similitudes and Phantasy, and (5) the plane of sense and 
ocular vision Each of these is a copy of the one above it, so that whatever 
appears in the sensible world is the symbol of an unseen reality. 

2 Cf. Luke VI: 39; Mett. XV: 1,4. 

125 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


experienced to dabble with and examine the different conflicting 
opinions is like urging the man whose faith is firmly established to 
mix with the unbelievers. For the same reason the faint-hearted are 
not allowed to attack the lines of the unbelievers but the task is 
delegated to the brave. Forgetting this subtle difference, some of the 
feeble-minded have thought that it was permissible to emulate the 
strong-minded in some of the lenient attitudes which they have taken 
towards certain questions, failing thereby to realize that the 
responsibilities of the strong differ from those of the weak. In this 
connexion someone said, “Whoever should see me at the beginning 
of my journey would become righteous ( siddiq ), but whoever should 
see me at the end would become unrighteous ( zindiq ), because at the 
end the acts of worship would be performed inwardly, and the senses 
would be rendered passive except in the fulfilment of the ordained 
duties. Then it would seem to the observers that the travellers were 
indolent, lazy, and negligent.” But how far from the truth this is 
because the end is the state wherein the heart basks in the light of 
Presence, seeing Him face to face, and invoking His name constanally 
which is forever the best form of worship. For the feeble-minded to 
imitate the strong-minded in things which are clearly wrong is like his 
throwing a little refuse into a pitcher of water and justifying himself 
by p ointing out several times more dirt is being continually dumped 
into the sea which is greater than the pitcher.' He then says that what 
is permissible in the case of the sea is still the more permissible in that 
of the pitcher. 2 But the poor fellow does not realize that, because of 

its enonnity, the sea decomposes all refuse into water and consequently 

every u nclftanliness , through the prevalence of the waters, is made, 
like the sea, clean. But a little refuse in the pitcher prevails over its 
contents of water and makes it, like itself, unclean. For a similar 
reason the Prophet was allowed what was forbidden to others. He 
was thus permitted to have nine wives, because he had enough vitality' 
to enable him to deal justly with them despite their number. Others 
besides him would not be able to be even partially just with their 
wives, with the result that jealousy would develop among them and 


1. John IV: 23-3. 

2. Cf. al-Bukhari, Nikah, 4. 


finally would drive the men, in their efforts to please, to trespass 
against God. He who would compare angels with blacksmiths would 
not succeed. 

The fifth duty is that the seeker after knowledge should not 
allow any branch or kind of praiseworthy knowledge to escape him 
without carefully examining it in order to become familiar with its 
aims and purposes, and should time permit, he should take it up in 
detail; otherwise he should address himself to and master the most 
important, while acquainting himself with the rest, because the 
different branches of knowledge are both supplementary to one 
another and closely inter-related. Besides one of the immediate 
benefits of such acquaintance is that the student will no longer persist 
in his hostility' to branches of knowledge other than his own — a 
hostility bom of ignorance because, ordinarily, men are the enemies 
of the thing they do not know. Said God, “And not having submitted 
to guidance, they proceed to say, ‘It is an age-long lie 1 The poet 
said: 

“Fresh water in the mouth of the sick seems bitter . 2 

Knowledge, whether lower or higher, either leads men to God 
or helps them a little on their way. In this respect it is classified in 
relation to its ability to draw them nearer to their goal, [namely God], 
or how far it can send them away from that goal. Those who take up 
these branches of knowledge are like the guards who patrol the 
frontiers and outposts — each has his own rank, and according to that 
rank he has a reward in the hereafter, provided he had thereby sought 
the face of God. 

The sixth duty- is that the student should not address himself 
at the same time to every branch of knowledge, but should rather 
observe some kind of order and begin with the most important, 
especially since life is ordinarily too short to enable a person to 
pursue all the branches of knowledge. It is therefore wise to acquire 


1. Surah XL VI: 10. 

2. This verse is by al-Mutanabbi; see his Diwan , ed, S. I. Sadir (Beirut, 
1900), p. 116, l", II. 


126 


127 


The Book of Knowledge 


the best of everything, satisfying oneself, so to speak, with the mere 
tasting of it while directing whatever power one has left, after having 
obtained all available knowledge, towards mastering that noblest of 
all sciences, the science of the hereafter including the science of 
practical religion, as well as the science of revelation. The goal of the 
science of practical religion is revelation and the goal of revelation 
is to know God. By this I do not mean the creed which the common 
folk receive from their parents or accept on the authorin' of others, 
nor the rules of dialectics and argumentation in defence of one’s 
position against the devious attacks of adversaries which is the aim 
of the theologians. What I mean is a form of conviction, which is the 
result of a light with which God floods the heart of a servant who, 
through self-mortification, has purified his soul from all impurities 
until he has attained to the measures of abu-Bakr’s faith which, as the 
Lord of creation testified, would outweigh the faith of all the w'orld 
if it were ever compared with it. 

I do not believe that the layman’s belief, systematized by the 
theologian whose profession — because he excelled the layman in the 
art of stringing words together — was called the science of words 
(kalcim), was beyond the ability’ of ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, ‘ Ali, and the rest 
of Companions. But abu-Bakr excelled them all by virtue of the 
secret which rested in his bosom. It is, moreover, strange that a 
person, who had heard such sayings from the Prophet, should despise 
and dismiss similar sayings claiming that they were Sufi drivel and 
consequently unreasonable. You should, therefore, be careful, 
otherwise you would lose your capital. Work hard to possess that 
secret which is not found in the paraphernalia of the jurisprudents and 
theologians, and which you cannot attain except through your 
diligent search. 

In short the noblest and the highest of all sciences is to know 
God. This science is like a sea the depth of which cannot be 
determined. In this science the highest rank is that of the prophets, 
then that of the saints and finally those that follow. It has been related 
that the portraits of two of the ancient wise men were seen on the wall 
of a certain mosque. In the one portrait one of the two wise men holds 


128 


The Boo k of Knowledge , 

in the hand a scroll on which is written, “When you have done 
everything well, think not that you have fulfilled all until you have 
come to know God and to know that He is the Cause of all causes and 
the Creator of all things.” In the other portrait the second wise man 
also holds a scroll on which is written, “Before I had known God I 
was wont to drink and thirst again; but when I have known Him my 
thirst was quenched without any drinking.” 1 

The seventh 2 duty is that no one shou ld address himself to one 
branch of knowledge before he has already mastered the branch 
which precedes it because science is of necessity so arranged that one 
branch prepares for another and one branch leads to another. Only 
the person who would observe this order would succeed. God said, 
“Those to whom We have given the Book, they read it as it ought to 
be read.” 3 In other words they do not leave a single branch of 
knowledge until they have mastered it in theory and in practice. 
Furthermore, in every branch of knowledge which the student may 
pursue,, his aim should be the one above. Nor should he ever declare 
a certain science useless because its protagonists disagree among 
themselves, or because of the error of one or more among them, or 
because with their actions they violate the ordinances of their own 
science. Thus you find some who have relinquished the philosophical 
and theological sciences excusing themselves on the grounds that if 
these sciences had any truth in them they would have been 
comprehended by their protagonists. (These fallacies have been 
exposed in the Mi'yar al-Ilm). A Others believe that the medical 
science is false because of an error they have seen committed by a 
physi cian Another group believes in the authenticity of astrology 
because a single prediction involving a certain person turned out right 
while others disbelieve it because in another case the prediction was 
faulty. All are wrong, however. Each case should be determined 
separately, as not every branch of knowledge can be independently 
mastered by every person. For this reason ‘Ali said, “Accept no truth 

1. Cf John IV: 7-14, 

2. The seventh duty is found only in C and the margin of SM while lacking 
in B and the text of SM- 

3. Surah H: 115, 

4. By the author, printed in Cairo, A.H. 1329. 

10 129 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book «f Knowledge 


because of the men who hold it but first find the truth and thou shalt 
know who are its real protagonists.” 

The eighth duty is to know how to ascertain the noble nature 
of this or the other science. By this is meant two things; the nobility 
of its fruit and the authenticity of its principles. Take for example the 
science of religion and medicine. The fruit of the erne is eternal life and 
the fruit of the other is the physical life; consequently the science of 
religion is the nobler; or again the science of arithmetic and astrology: 
the former is the nobler because of the firmer and more authentic 
foundations of its principles. If on the other hand arithmetic should 
be compared with medicine the latter would be the nobler with respect 
to its fruit while with respect to its principles arithmetic would be the 
nobler. The fruit, however, has the priority. For this reason medicine, 
although mostly guess work, is nobler. Similarly it becomes evident 
that the noblest of all sciences is the science of knowing God, His 
angels. Books and apostles as well as that of knowing the path which 
leads to these sciences. Seek, therefore, nothing else and treasure 
nothing besides. 

The ninth duty is that the student’s purpose should, at the time, 
be the adornment and beautification of his inner self with virtue, and 
at the end, nearness of God and ascent to the neighbourhood of the 
heavenly hosts, the angels and the cherubim. His aim should not be 
die a ttainment of authority or influence nor contention with foolish 
men and boasting before his peers. But if his aim was to draw near 
to God he would inevitably seek that which was closest to it, namely 
the science of the hereafter. Nevertheless he should not look with 
contempt upon the other sciences such as the sciences of 
jurisprudence, the sciences of syntax and grammar which are 
connected with the Qur’an and the sunnah, and other sciences like 
those already mentioned in connexion with the auxiliary and 
supplementary sciences' discussed under those sciences the acquisition 
of which is fardkifayah. 

You should not, however gather from our enthusiastic praise 

1. See supra, p. 39 


of the science of the hereafter that we seek to disparage the other 
sciences. On the contrary those who have undertaken to study them 
are like those who have undertaken to guard the outpost of Islam 
where they are encamped, or like the conquerors who are warring on 
behalf of God. Of them some are active fighters, others are on the 
reserve, others are in charge of the water supply, while others look 
after the mounts; but all will receive their reward if their aim is the 
glory of the word of God rather than the possession of spoils. God 
said, “God will raise those of you who believe, and those to whom 
knowledge has been given, to loftier ranks.”' And again referring to 
those who have followed His good pleasure, “there are (varying) 
grades with God .” 3 Virtue is relative and our scorn for the money 
changers when we compare them with royalty does not mean that 
they are contemptible when compared with the street cleaners. Do not 
think, therefore, that whatever falls short of the highest rank is 
worthless. For the highest rank belongs to the prophets, followed by 
that of the saints, then that of the learned men who ar well versed in 
knowledge, and finally the righteous according to their ranks. In short 
“whosoever shall have wrought an atom’s weight of good shall 
behold it; and whosoever shall have wrought an atom’s weight of evil 
shall behold it .” 3 Whosoever will seek God through knowledge, no 
matter what kind, he is sure to profit and advance. 

The tenth duty of the student is that he should know the relation 
of the different sciences to the goal so that he might not attach more 
importance to closeby, inconsequential matters than to remote but 
important things. The word important signifies anything which is of 
import to you; and nothing is of any import save your fate in this 
world and the next. But since, as said in the Qur’an and attested by 
insight and experience, it is not possible to enjoy both the pleasures 
of this world and the bliss of the next, it is more important to concern 
oneself with those things which will endure forever. Then will this 
world become a temporary abode, the body a vehicle, and works the 
power which will ‘propel’ itto the goal. Furthermore, there is no goal 

T. Surah LVOI: 12. 2. Surah ID: 157. 

3. Surah XCDC: 7-8. 


130 


131 



The Book of Knowledge 


except meeting God; and, despite the fact that very few in this world 
do realize its significance, in its achievement lies all bliss. 

As related to the happiness attending meeting God seeing His 
glorious face, which the prophets understood and sought but both 
laymen and theologians have failed to grasp, the sciences are of three 
grades. These grades can be understood by comparison with the 
following illustration. The slave whose freedom as well as the right 
to hold property are dependent upon performing the pilgrimage has 
been told that if he would perform the pilgrimage he would receive 
both his freedom and the right to hold property; but if he had made 
his preparations and actually set out, then for some unavoidable 
reason was detained on the way, he would receive his freedom only, 
thereby escaping the wretchedness of slavery, but would fail to enjoy 
the right to hold property. To accomplish all that he has to do three 
ri»jn g« First, the preparation of the means of travel of buying a she- 
camel and a water-skin, and by packing the provisions and fitting out 
the mount. Second, setting out on the journey to the K‘abah and 
leaving behind home and kin. Third the fulfilment of the ceremonials 
of the pilgrimage one after the other. Then after he had fulfilled all 
nhliffitinn. and discarded the habit of pilgrimage (hay at al-ihram ), 
having already performed the farewell circumambulation (tawaf al- 
wida *) of the k’abah, he would qualify for freedom and the right to 
hold property. To every- stage in the journey- there is a corresponding 
rank: one for the preparation for the journey, another for setting out 
on the journey and crossing deserts, and third for performing the 
duties of the pilgrimage. Thus he who has already begun to carry out 
the duties of foe pilgrimage is closer to happiness than either he who 
is still occupied in packing the provisions and fitting out foe mount 
or he who has just embarked on the journey. 

Similarly the science are of three kinds: One corresponds to 
the p oking of the provisions, the fitting out of the mount, and the 
purchase the she-camel; it is science of medicine and jurisprudence 
and whatever pertains to the physical welfare of the body Another 
corresponds to travelling in the desert and surmounting obstacles; it 
is foe purification of the inner being from impure qualities as well as 


132 


The Book of Knowledge 


surmounting those enormous obstacles against which both foe 
ancients and the modems have foiled, and over which only those 
favoured by God have prevailed. This is following the way foe 
acquisition of the knowledge of which is like the acquisition of foe 
knowledge of the directions of the different desert routes and foe 
encampments along the way. And just as foe knowledge of foe 
l ocat ion of these encampments and acquaintance with the desert 
routes is useless without actually crossing them, so is the science of 
ethics useless without practice. Yet practice without knowledge is 
not possible. A third corresponds to the pilgrimage and its duties; it 
is the science of knowing God, His attributes, angels, and works as 
well as that we have mentioned in the survey of the science of 
revelation. In it is salvation and attainment of happiness. Salvation 
will be the lot of any follower of the path provided his aim be the true 
goal which is safety. The attainment of happiness, however, is not 
achieved except by the gnostics who know God and are close to Him, 
who are given to enjoy in His neighbourhood happiness, bounty and 
a garden of bliss. But to those who fell short of the foil measure of 
perfection, only salvation and peace are given. This is in accordance 
to the words of God when He said, “But as to him who shall enjoy 
near access to God, his shall be happiness, bounty and a garden of 
bliss. But as to him who shall be of those of foe right hand, his shall 
be (the greeting) — ‘Peace to thee’ — from those of the right hand. 

Anyone who does not proceed on foe path which leads to God 
nor set out on (the journey), or anyone who does set out, not because 
of obedience or devotion, but for expedience, belongs to those of the 
left who have gone astray, and his shall be, “an abode of scalding 
water and broiling of hell-fire . 12 

You should know, therefore, that this according to the learned, 
men who were well-versed in the science of religion, is foe “certain 
truth ” 3 a truth which they have perceived inwardly through 
contemplation (mushahadah). This contemplation is more real and 
clearer than seeing with the eye. In it they rose above the stage of 

7 . Surah LVI; 87-90~ T Ibid: 93-94. 

3. Ibid: 95. 

I* 

133 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


accepting truth on authority. They are like those who having heard, 
believed, then having seen for themselves were confirmed in their 
belief. The others are like those who accept truth and belief without 
enjoying either contemplation or the opportunity of seeing with their 
own eyes. Happiness lies beyond the science of revelation which in 
turn comes after the science of practical religion, the last being the 
following of the path of the hereafter. Overcoming the frailties of 
human nature as well as doing away with its blameworthy elements 
is possible only after mastering the science of human nature. The 
science of therapeutics and its administration depend upon the 
science of hygiene. The promotion of the conditions of health and 
hygiene by united action, mutual help and co-operation through 
which clothing, as well as the means of livelihood and lodging are 
secured, is entrusted to the magistrates, while the principles in 
accordance with which it is carried out for conducting human affairs 
in the spirit of justice and good government are in the domain of the 
jurisprudent. On the other hand the condition of health pertains to the 
physician. Thus anyone who says that science is divided into two 
parts — the science of the bodies (i.e. medicine) and the science of 
religion and means by the latter jurisprudence, has in mind the 
common exoteric sciences rather than the specialized esoteric studies . 

Should you ask why have I likened medicine and jurisprudence 
to the packing of the provisions and the fitting out of the mount, then 
know that that which seeks to press towards God in order to attain a 
place in His neighbourhood is the heart and not the body. And by the 
heart I do not mean the palpable matter of flesh but one of the 
mysteries (sing, sirr) of God which the bodily senses fail to perceive; 
a spiritual substance (latifah) from God, sometimes indicated by the 
word spirit ( ruh ) and at times by the calm soul (al-nafs al- 
mutma imah). In law it is referred to as the heart (al-qalb) because 
it is the primary’ vehicle for that mystery (sirr), and through it the 
whole body' becomes a vehicle and an instrument for that spiritual 
substance (latifah). To remove the veil from that belongs to the 
science of revelation, a science withheld from men, and its discussion 
is proscribed. The limit to which it is permissible to go in its 
discussion is to say that it is a precious jewel and a pearl of 


inestimable worth, more excellent than all material objects. It is a 
divine commandihent as God Himself explained when He said, “And 
thev will ask thee of the Spirit. Say: The Spirit (proceedeth) from the 
command of my Lord .” 1 All created things stand in relation to God 
but the relation (of the heart) is of nobler character than that of any 
of the other organs. To God belong both “the creation and the 
command ,” 2 but the latter is the greater. This is the precious jewel 
which contains the trust of God and which antedates the Heavens 
and the Earth and the mountains, since when it was offered to them 
they refused its burden and feared to receive it 3 because of the world 
of dominion ( alam al-amr) i .e., the attributes of God. This should 
not be taken to mean that the (spirits) are eternal, as he who holds that 
the spirits are eternal is a blind fool who does not know what he says. 
Because this is beyond the scope of our subject let us desist from its 
discussion. What is intended here is to show that this spiritual 
substance (latifah) is the driving force which presses toward God, 
because it has proceeded from the command of the Lord. It came 
from God and to God it returns 

As to the body it is only the vehicle which that spiritual 
substance occupied and through which it accomplishes its work. The 
body serves the same purpose for it on the path of God as the she- 
camel does for a man on the pilgrim route; or like the water-skin in 
which is stored the water which the body needs. Thus every science 
the aim of which is the welfare of the body is a contributor to the 
welfare of the vehicle of the spiritual substance. It is evident that 
medicine is one of these sciences because it is necessary for the 
preservation of health, Even if the individual were living by himself 
he would be in need of the science of medicine. Jurisprudence, 
however, differs from medicine in that it may be dispensed with by 
the individual if he were living by himself. But man has been created 
in a way which makes it impossible for him to live all alone since he 
is unable to secure his food and livelihood through tilling, forming, 
bread-making, and cooking as well as manufacturing clothes, building 

1. Surah XVII: 87. 2. Surah VO: 52. 

3. Cf. Surah. XXXffl. 72. 


134 


135 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


houses or constructing tools for all these activities. Man was, 
therefore, compelled to lead an agrarian life of co-operation. But no 
matter how much people mix with one another their ambitions are 
aroused and consequently they compete for the satisfaction of their 
desires, and contend and struggle for their fulfilment. From their 
struggle would result their destruction because of the external 
disharmony in the body politic just as it would result from internal 
disturbances in their physical bodies whenever the harmony between 
die humours is lacking. Through medicine the harmony between the 
opposing humours within the body is maintained and through politics 
and justice the harmony between the contending elements in the body 
politic is preserved. The science of how to maintain harmony 
between the humours is medicine, and the science of how to preserve 
harmony among men in their affairs and transactions ^jurisprudence. 
Both of these, whether medicine or jurisprudence, are for the 
preservation of the body which is the vehicle of the spirit. The person 
who devotes himself to the study of either medicine or jurisprudence, 
unless he mortifies his body and reforms his heart, is like the person 
who purchases the she-camel and its feed as well as the water-skin 
(in preparation for the pilgrimage) but never does set out. And he who 
spends his life over the niceties of words which occur in the course 
of the debates of jurisprudence is like him who spends his life tracing 
the minute fibres of the strings with which the water-skin that the 
pilgrim carries is sewn together. The relation of the former, of the 
followers ofthe path of reforming the heart which leads to the science 
of revelation is like the relation of the latter to those who go forward 
along the pilgrimage route or those who perform its duties. 

Think therefore of these things and then accept this free advice 
from one who has accomplished these things but only achieved them 
after a great struggle and a brave effort to break away from the 
established tradition of men, the common folk and the elite, which 
tradition is based on ambition and lust. 

The duties of the teacher 

Man occupies four states in relation to knowledge similar to 
136 


the four states he occupies in relation to money. One state is that of 
the acquisitiveness of the financial lord, in which case he would be 
seeking; another is that of possession which would eliminate the 
necessity of asking for help; another is that of spending his money on 
himself, in which case he would be indulging in the luxuries it affords; 
and finally there is the state of spending his money on others, in which 
case he would be a generous philanthropist. This last state is the 
noblest. 

So also is it with regard to knowledge. First, there is the state 
of seeking knowledge in which man is acquisitive: another is that of 
having knowledge in which state he would not need to inquire of 
others; athird state is that of reflection wherein he would contemplate 
and enjoy his achievement; and last, there is the state of teaching 
wherein he imparts his knowledge to others. This last state is the 
noblest. 

“Thus he who has knowledge and shall do and teach the same 
shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.” 1 — In this state the 
teacher is like the sun, which being itself luminous, sheds light; or like 
the musk which being itself fragrant, makes other objects fragrant. 
On the other hand he who possesses knowledge but does not practise 
it is like a notebook, which itself being unintelligent, nevertheless 
serves as a medium of transmission of the knowledge that its pages 
contain: or like the whetstone, which, itself being blunt, sharpens the 
razor; or like the needle, which while it remains naked, serves in 
making clothing for others; or like the wick of a lamp which bums 
itself out in giving light for others. A poet said. 

“A glowing wick is he 
Who gives his light and dies.” 

Whoever takes up teaching for a profession takes upon 
himself a great mission and a grave responsibility. He should, 
therefore, observe its proprieties and fulfil its duties. The following 
are these duties. 


1. See supra, p. 2! 

137 



The Book of Knowledge 


The first duty of the teacher is to be sympathetic to students 
and treat them as his own children. The Prophet said, “I am to you 
like a father who desires to save his child from the fires of hell, which 
is more important than any of the efforts of parents to save their 
children from the fires of the earth.”' For this reason the rights of the 
teacher have become greater than the rights of the parents. The 
parents are the cause of the children’s present existence in this mortal 
life, while the teacher is the cause of their immortal life. Without him 
that which has been brought into existence through the parents would 
be doomed to eternal destruction. Only the teacher is of service for 
the eternal life in the next world. By teacher I mean the teacher of the 
sciences of the hereafter or the science of this world, whose goal, in 
all his work, is bliss in the hereafter and not success in this world. 
Teaching with a view to achieving success in this world is destruction 
for both the teacher and the student. From such destruction we seek 
refuge with God. 

Just as it is the duty of the children of one father to love one 
another and co-operate in achieving all their common goals so it is 
also the duty of fire students of one teacher to love and cherish one 
another. This is not possible unless the hereafter is their goal; but if 
this world is their aim, jealousy and hatred will plague them. 

The learned men and the children of the hereafter are travellers 
journeying to God, and starting from this world they follow the path 
to Him. The years and the months are only stations on the path. If 
friendship and love are fostered by companionship along the road 
among travellers journeying to different countries, how much more 
should they be fostered by companionship along the path to Paradise ! 

Since there will be no scarcity of happiness in the hereafter, 
there will be no struggle among its children; but whereas there is no 
abundance of pleasures in this world, men persist in struggle and 
competition. Those who seek to attain position of authority through 
knowledge exclude themselves from the company of those whom 
God meant when He said, “Verily the believers are brethren,” 2 and 

1 . Cf ibn-Hanbal, Taharah, 121; abu-Dawud, Taharah, 4 . 

2 Surah XLIX: 10. 

138 


The Book cf Knowledge 

include themselves among those of whom God said. Friends on that 
day shall become foes to one another, except the God-fearing.”' 

The second duty of the teacher is to follow the example of the 
Law-giver: he should seek no remuneration for his services on behalf 
of knowledge and accept neither reward nor thanks Rather he should 
impart his knowledge free for the glory of God and for the sake of 
drawing near to Him. He should not feel that his students are under 
any obligation to Him although the feeling of obligation is incumbent 
upon them. He should give them credit for disciplining their hearts 
with knowledge in order to draw near to God. Thus, when someone 
lends you a lot of land so that you can exploit it for yourself by 
planting it. The benefits you reap are greater than those of the owner 
of the land Would you then feel that he was under any obligation to 
you? Similarly, in teaching, your compensation is greater than that 
of the student, and without him you would not have attained it. 
Therefore, look for no reward except from God Who said in His 
Book, “Oh mv people, I ask you not for riches: my reward is of God 
alone'” 2 Riches as well as everything in the world are servants of the 
body while the bodv is the vehicle of the soul which, in turn, is in the 
service of knowledge with which it is honoured. Therefore anyone 
who would seek riches through knowledge is like the person who, in 
orderto clean the soles ofhis shoes, would wipe them against his face, 

reducing thereby the master into a servant, and making of the slave, 
a lord. This is what is meant by falling headlong and is exactly like 
the fate of the criminals on the day of judgment when they shall 
droop their heads before their Lord.” 3 In short, to the teacher belong 
the honour and the credit. Nevertheless see how the affairs of religion 
have fallen into the hands of men who claim that their sole aim, in 
pursuing the sciences of jurisprudence and theology and in teaching 
these two and other sciences besides, is to draw near unto God, yet 
they sacrifice their riches and rank, and suffer great humiliations in 
the service of rulers in order to gain their favou rs. Were these men 

1. Surah XLIU: 67 

2. Surah XI: 3 1 ; B and text of SM have Surah XLEI: 22 instead. 

3. Cf Surah XXXII: 12. 


139 


The Book of Knowledge 


to turn away from such practices they would be ignored and no one 
would turn to them for advice. 

Furthermore the teacher often expects the student to follow 
him in everything, and to back his supporters, fight his adversaries, 
rise publicly to perform his demands, and to wait upon him in all his 
needs. If the student fails to fulfil all these expectations the teacher 
will turn against him and become one of his most virulent enemies. 
How despicable is the learned man who is not only content with such 
a position but is also proud of it, and is not ashamed to say that his 
aim in taking up teaching is to spread knowledge for the sake of 
drawing near unto God and for defending His religion! But you have 
only to look at the record in order to see the hypocrisy and the 
deception of it all. 

The third duty of the teacher is that he should not withhold 
from the student any advice, or allow him to attempt the work of any 
grade unless he is qualified for it, or permit him to address himself 
to abstruse sciences before he has mastered those which are clear. He 
should also point out to him that the purpose of acquiring knowledge 
is to draw near unto God rather than power, boasting, and competition, 
and should, in the strongest possible way, condemn any such things 
in his students. 

The harm which the unrighteous learned man does is greater 
than the good. If the teacher notices that the student is seeking 
knowledge only for the sake of worldly advantages, he should 
examine what sciences the student is pursuing. If he finds that these 
sciences are those of disputation in jurisprudence, argument in 
theology, and handing down opinions in controversies and legal 
disputes, then he should dissuade him from them because they' do not 
belong either to the sciences of the hereafter or to those which have 
already been described as sciences which we leant for a purpose other 
than the service of God but turn out to be for that same purpose, the 
most useful. These include the sciences of interpretation and tradition 
as well as those branches of knowledge to which the ancients 


The Book of Knowledge 


addressed themselves in connexion with the science of the hereafter 
and the science of the characteristics of the soul together with the 
manner of their reform. If the student had learnt these things with the 
intention of seeking the world with his learning he had better be let 
alone because, although he had addressed himself to them in the hope 
of becoming a preacher and gaining a following, he would, in the 
course of his work, wake up to the fact that in them lie those sciences 
which are conducive to the fear of God and which belittle the world 
and glorify 1 the hereafter. This may finally lead the student to the right 
path and he would then observe what he preaches to others. The 
desire to be popular and influential are to man like the grains which 
are scattered around the trap in order to snare catch the birds. The 
same thing has been done by God in connexion with man: He created 
sexual desire in order to ensure procreation and the survival of the 
race . He also created ambition as a means for perpetuating knowledge, 
a thing highly desirable in these sciences. But to devote one’s life to 
sheer controversies, theological argumentations, and unusual details 
while ignoring other studies promotes, in all except those to whom 
God has shown mercy or those who have taken up other religious 
sciences as well, nothing but hardening in the heart, negligence 
toward God, excess in iniquity, and inordinance in striving for power. 
There is no better proof for this than personal experience and 
observation. Therefore look, leant, and think so that you might 
witness the realization of this fact by men all over the world. Truly 
God is the source of our help. 

It has been related that Sufyan al-Thawri was once seen in a 
sad mood and was, therefore, asked, ‘Why are you sad? To which he 
replied.” We have become a traffic for the children of this world. One 
after another would attach himself to us until he had acquired a 
measure of learning; whereupon he would be appointed a judge, or 
a governor, or a mayor of the place ( qahraman ).” 

The fourth duty which is one of the finer points of the 
profession of teaching is that the teacher, in dissuading the student 
from his evil ways, should do so by suggestion rather than openly. 


140 


141 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


and with sympathy rather than with odious upbraiding. Open 
dissuasion destroys the veil of awe, invites defiance, and encourages 
stubbornness. The Prophet, who is the guide of every teacher, said in 
this connexion, “If men had been forbidden to make porridge of 
camels’ dung, they would have done it, saying that they would not 
have been forbidden to do it unless there had been some good in it.” 
The same principle is brought out in the story of Adam and Eve and 
the prohibition imposed upon them.' This story' has not been related 
as a night entertainment but as an example and a reminder. Such 
allusions and suggestions invite men of noble souls and discerning 
minds to attempt to elicit their import, and the pleasure of grasping 
their meaning results in a greater desire on the part of man for 
learning in order to show that such things are not beyond the capacity 
of his intellect. 

The fifth duty is that the person who is teaching a certain 
science should not belittle or disparage the value of other sciences 
before his students. Thus it is customary for the teacher of language 
to disparage jurisprudence and the teacher of jurisprudence to slight 
the sciences of tradition and interpretation saying that they are 
nothing but stories and narratives similar to those of old women and 
that there is no room in them for intellect or reason. The teacher of 
theology' is in the habit of avoiding jurisprudence and saying that it 
is nothing but hair-splitting and disputations and menstruation and, 
therefore, should not be compared with theology' — the study of the 
attributes of God. 

Such traits are blameworthy and reprehensible in teachers, 
and should be avoided. In fact the teacher of one science should 
prepare the student for the study of other subjects, and whenever he 
is responsible for the teaching of more than one subject, he should 
observe the rules of gradual progress in promoting his students from 
one grade to another. 

The sixty duty, of the teacher is that he should limit the student 
to what the latter is able to understand and should not require of him 

T. C/ Sumfc, D: 33; VII: 18-9; Gen. 2: 16-7. 


anything which his mind cannot grasp for fear that he would develop 
a feeling of dislike for the subject, and his mind would become 
confused. In this the teacher should follow the example of the lord of 
men who said, “We prophets have been commanded to give every 
man his rightful place and to communicate with everyone according 
to his own ability to understand.”’ Therefore let the teacher impart 
the truth to his student if he is sure that the latter is able to understand 
it. The Prophet said, “No one ever relates a tradition to a people 
which is bey ond their minds to understand without being the cause 
of perplexity to some of them.” 2 ‘Ali, pointing to his breast, said, 
“Herein lies much knowledge. Would that there were some to 
comprehend and transmit it?” He was right in his assertion because 
the hearts of the righteous are the vaults of divine mysteries. 
Therefore the learned man should not divulge all his knowledge to 
any one indiscriminately, especially when the student, who may be 
able to understand that knowledge, is not capable of making use of 
it, and still less when the student does not understand it. 

Jesus said, ‘Do not hang pearls around the neck of a swine.’ 3 
But wisdom is better than pearls and he who abhors it is worse than 
a swine. For this reason it has been said, “In order to be safe from 
his hand and useful to him deal with every' person with the measure 
of his own intellect and mete out into him with the scale of his own 
mind. Otherwise, because of the disparity between the measure and 
the mind, your efforts will result in failure.” 

A certain learned man was once asked about something but he 
gave no answer. Then his questioner said to him, “Have you not 
heard that the Apostle of God said, ‘Whoever will conceal any useful 
knowledge will, on the day of resurrection, be bridled with a bit of 
fire’.” The learned man replied, “You may leave the bit here and go. 
Then if anyone who understands comes and I still conceal that useful 
knowledge from him, let God bridle me with that bit of fire.” Did not 
God say, “Do not give to the fools your substance,” 4 as a warning 

1 . For first part of tradition cf. Muslim, Intro.; second part unidentified. 

2. Cf. Muslim, Intro. 3. Cf Matt. 7:6. 

4. Surah, IV: 4. 


142 


143 





The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


that the safeguarding of knowledge from those who might corrupt it 
is more important than imparting it. Similarly to give to those who 
are not in need is not a lesser offence than withholding help from those 
who are in need. 

Shall pearls be giv’n to herders of the sheep. 

Shall wealth be trusted to their rustic keep? 

They would not comprehend nor know its worth. 

To give them would be adorning beasts. 

But God is kind if by His grace He sends 

One worthy of my knowledge, of my wit. 

To him my goods I’ll give and gain his love; 

Until such time I will withhold my gifts — 

One’s learning would be wasted upon fools; 

And he doth sin who from the worthy keeps. 

The seventh duty is that the teacher should give his backward 
students only such things as are clear and suitable to their limited 
understanding and should not mention to them anything about the 
details that are apt to followbut which he deems fitting for the present 
to withhold. Such a course would discourage the students and make 
their interest even in easy subjects, lukewarm, perplex them in their 
minds and make them dunk that the real reason for the teacher’s 
reluctance to impart to them those details is his illiberality, especially 
because everyone usually believes himself capable of mastering 
ever\ r science no matter how complex. Thus there is no one who is not 
satisfied with God for the perfect mind He gave him. Even the most 
foolish and most feeble minded among men is usually the most 
pleased with the perfection of his mind. For this reason any one of the 
common folk who is law-abiding and in whose heart the articles of 
faith, which have come down to him from his forbears, and 
unequivocally and unqualifiedly established, and his conduct is good 
but his mind is not capable of anything bey ond that, such a person 
should not be confused in his belief. On the contrary’ he should be let 
alone because if he were confronted with the esoteric interpretations 
of externals he w ould relinquish his standing as a layman w ithout 
attaining the status of an educated man. Then will the obstacles which 


have hitherto deterred him from evil crumble and he will be transformed 
into a rebellious devil who will destroy both himself and others. In 
fact laymen should not be bothered with discussion on the realities 
which underlie complex sciences but rather should be confined to 
instruction in the acts of worship ( ‘ ibadat ) and honesty in carrying 
out their respective professions. Their hearts should be filled with 
yearning for Paradise and fear of Hell-fire as the Qur’an has 
ordained. They should not be confused with questionable ideas for 
fear that such ideas strike root in their hearts with the result that it 
becomes difficult for them to free themselves from such errors and 
consequently fall victims to misery and destruction. In short the door 
of controversy and discussion should not be opened to the laymen 
because it will interfere with their professions on which the welfare 
of the world as well as the continued happiness of the elite depends. 

The eighth duty is that the teacher do what he teaches and not 
allow his works to give the lie to his words, because knowledge is 
comprehended through the mind while works through the eyes. But 
those who see with their eyes are more than those who perceive with 
their minds and therefore when practice contradicts theory 
righteousness is frustrated. And again whenever a person partakes of 
something and warns others not to touch it because it is a deadly 
poison, he makes himself a laughing stock to men and lays himself 
open to their accusations and, what is still worse, he makes them more 
anxious to try w’hat they have been forbidden to do, saying that had 
it not been the sweetest and the most delicious of all things, he would 
not have kept it exclusively for himself. The relation of the guide to 
those who seek his guidance is like the relation of the stamp to the clay 
and like that of the shadow of the cane to the cane itself. How then 
could the clay be stamped with a stamp that bears no character and 
how could the shadow of the cane be straight if the cane itself were 
crooked? The following verse conveys the same meaning. 

If thou condemn a sin and then commit 

The same transgression, shame upon thy head. 

God also said, “Will ye enjoin what is right upon others, and 


144 


11 


145 


The Book of Knowledge 


forget yourselves?” 1 For this reason the learned man’s responsibility 
for his sins is greater than that of the ignorant especially because 
many will follow the learned man’s example and will be misled 
through his faults. And whoever establishes an evil precedent 
shoulders responsibility for that precedent and for the sins of those 
who might follow its example. ‘ Ali said, ‘Two men have broken my 
back [with the weight of their sins]: a debauched learned man and an 
ascetical ignorant one The former misleads men through his 
debauchery and the latter through his asceticism.” 


I. 5wufc,ll:41. 


146 


SECTION VI 


On the Evils of Knowledge and on Determining the 
Distinguishing Features of the Learned Men of the Hereafter and 
those of the Teachers of Falsehood. 

We have already enumerated the excellence of knowledge and 
of the learned man, while concerning the teachers of falsehood 
several important strictures have been mentioned. These strictures 
have shown that the teachers of falsehood are the most severely 
punished of all men on the day of resurrection. It is therefore very 
important to ascertain what distinguishes the learned men of this 
world from the learned men of the hereafter. By the learned ...en of 
this world we mean the teachers of falsehood whose sole purpose in 
pursuing knowledge is to enjoy the luxuries of this life and to achieve 
power and position among its people. The Prophet said, “The most 
severely punished of all men on the day of resurrection will be the 
learned man whom God has not blessed with His knowledge; 1 and 
again “No man will be learned unless he puts knowledge into 
practice.” 2 The Prophet also said, “Knowledge is of two kinds: 
formal knowledge which does not go beyond verbal profession — it 
is the evidence of God against His people and according to it He 
would judge them, and genuine knowledge deep-rooted in the heart 
—this is the knowledge which is useful.” 3 Muhammad also declared, 
“At the end of time there will be ignorant worshippers and corrupt 
learned men.” 4 He also said, “Acquire not knowledge in order to vie 
with the learned, dispute with and silence the insolent, and win favour 
and popularity among men, for whosoever would do this would be 
doomed to Hell-fire,” 5 and again “Whoever would conceal his 

1 See supra, p. 1 . 2 Cf. al-Darimi, Intro., 29: 6. 

3. Ibid., 34: 4. 4. Cf. Hikyat al-Awliya', Vol. II,pp. 

5. Cf ibn-Majah, Intro., 23: 4-5 331-2. 


147 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


knowle dge, «mild he bridled by God with abit of fire. 1 The Prophet 
also said, “Others make me more afraid for your safety than the anti- 
Christ (al-dajjal)" On being asked whom he meant, he replied. The 
false teachers.” 2 Healso said, “Whoeverwould increase in knowledge 
but would not increase in righteousness would increase God’s w rath 
upon him.” 3 Jesus said, “How can you lead the night-travellers along 
the way when yourselves are perplexed.” 4 These and other traditions 
show die gravity of the danger inherent in know ledge and reveal the 
fed that a learned man is faced with either eternal destruction or 
y^mal hap piness They also show that man, by pursuing know ledge, 
is denied safety unless he attains happiness as well. 

We find in history the same evidence. ‘Umar said, “The thing 
I fear most for the safety of this nation is the learned hypocrite 5 
‘Umar was then asked how one could be both learned and 
hypocritical, to which he replied, “While his learning does not go 
beyond verbal knowledge, his heart remains untouched and his w orks 
betray no wisdom.” Al-Hasan al-Basri said, “Be not one of those 
who combine the knowledge of learned men and the briliant ideas of 
the wise but conduct themselves the way of fools.” 

A certain man addressed abu-Hurayrah saying, 1 want to 
acquire knowledge but I fear I shall lose it.” Abu-Hurayrah replied, 
“To discard knowledge is just the same as losing it. ’ Ibraham ibn- 
‘Uvaynah 6 was once asked, “Who is the man whose remorse will be 
the' greatest?” Ibn-’Uyaynah replied, “While life lasts it is the 
philanthropist who has extended his kindness to the ungrateful: but 
at death it syill be the learned man who neglected to put his 
knowledge into practice"’ Al-Khalil ibn-Ahmad said There are four 
lfmH« of men: One is the man who knows, and knows that he knows 

he is a lea " 1 *** man. and therefore follow him. Another is the man 

who knows, but does not know that he knows — he is asleep, w ake 

1. Cf ibn-Majah , Intro . 24: I. abu-Dawud, ilm, 9 

2. Cf al-Tayalisi, No. 975. 

3. Cf al-Darimi, intro., 34: 25. 

4 M-Ghazzali might have combined Luke vi: 39 and VII: 32 into one saying. 

5 Cf Tavalisi, No. 975. 

6 C and B, *Uya\nah. SM. Ulbah. Unidentified 


him up. Athird is the man who does not know,and knows that he does 
not know — he desires to leam, teach him. A fourth is the man who 
does not know, and does not know that he does not know — he is 
ignorant, reject him.” Sufyanal-Thawri said, “Knowledge summons 
works and, unless they respond, it departs.” Ibn-al-Mubarak said, 
“As long as a man continues to seek knowledge he remains learned, 
but the moment he thinks he has mastered all knowledge, he recedes 
into ignorance.” Al-Fudayl ibn-Tyad 1 said. Three men do I pity: a 
mighty man who has fallen, a rich man who has become poor and a 
learned man who has become lahghing stock for the world. Al- 
Hasan al-Basri said, “The penalty which the learned men receive for 
seeking the world through works which belong to the hereafter is the 
death of their hearts.” In this connexion a certain poet has said. 

Strange to me is he who barters good for evil; 

Stranger still the one who trades his soul for pleasure; 

But he who pays so dear a price as this, to rob 

The earthly joys of others, he is strangest yet. 

The Prophet, referring to the wicked learned man, said, “The 
learned man will suffer intense agonies of torture and, in order to 
increase his pain, will be made to go all around Hell, displaying 
himself to the people therein.” 2 Usamah ibn-Zayd 3 related that he 
heard the Apostle of God say, “On the day of resurrection the learned 
man will be brought fomard and thrown into the fires of Hell where, 
as a result, his bowels will gush out and he will be made to carry them 
round and round all over Hell in a manner similar to that of a donkey 
when it turns a mill-stone round and round. Then the people of Hell 
will ask him about the reasons of his torture and he will say, I was 
wont to enjoin what is right upon others but foiled to do it myself, and 
to forbid what is wrong and committed it myself.” 4 The learned man 
will receive a twofold penalty for his sin because he trespassed 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 


A.H. 187/ A.D. 802, see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. D, pp. 157-9. 


Unidentified Cf next tradition. 
Ibn-Harithah (A.H. 54/A.D. 674); see 
Tadhib al-Asma ', pp. 147-50. 
Al-Bukhari, Bad’ al-Khalq, 10. 


ibn-Sa'd, Vol. IV, pt. 1, pp. 43-51, 


148 


149 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


wilfully. For this reason God said, “Verily the hypocrites shall be in 
the lowest abyess of Fire .” 1 This, He said, because they have denied 
Him after they have known Him. God also deems the Jews more 
wicked than the Christians although the former, unlike the latter, 
have not given God a son nor said that He was one of three gods. The 
Jews, however, ha^e denied God despite their knowledge of Him. 
God said, “They know him even as they know their own children /’ 2 
And again. “Yet when that of which they had know ledge came to 
them they believed not in it. The execration of God be on the 
unbelievers /’ 3 In the course of the story of Bal‘am ibn-Ba‘ura , 4 God 
said, “Recite to them the story of him to w hom We vouchsafed Our 
signs and followed them not, and Satan pursued him and he became 
one of the beguiled;. . . . he is, therefore, like unto the dog who lolls out 
his tongue, whether thou chase him away, or leave him alone ” 5 Thus 
BaTam was given the Book of God but gave himself instead to lust 
and was, therefore, likened to a dog. In other words w hether or not 
he was given wisdom, he would go after lust. 

Jesus said, “The teachers of falsehood are like unto a rock 
which has fallen into the source of the stream; it neither absorbs any 
water itself nor permits it to flow out and reach the plants; or like unto 
the pipes w'hich lead into the cesspool: gypsum white on the outside 
while their interior is full of refuse and filth: or like unto sepulchres 
the exteriors of which are polished and clean but are within full of 
dead men’s bones .” 6 These traditions and historical narratives show' 
that the learned man of this world will occupy a more inferior position 
and will receive a more severe punishment than the ignorant man, 
while those who will succeed in attaining a seat in the neighbourhood 
of God are the learned men of the hereafter. 

Characteristic of the learned men of the hereafter are the 


1. Surah, IV: 144. 

2. See Surahs, II; 141; VI: 20. 

3. Sntah, 0: 83. 

4. Balaam the son of Beor; Cf Num, 22, 23, 24. 

5. Surah, VD: 174-5 

6. Cf Matt. 23: 4, 27 


following. They should not seek this world through their knowledge 
because the least of the learned men should know the insignificance 
of this life as well as its sordidness, foulness, and abrupt end in 
contrast to the greatness of the hereafter, its permanence, the purity 
of its happiness, and the majesty of its dominion. They should know 
that this world and the hereafter are diametrically opposed to each 
other, as hostile as fellow-wives — the more you please the one the 
more vou displease the other; or as the tw'o scales of a balance the 

lower the one falls the higher the other rises ; or as the east and the west 
— the more vou advance towards the one the father away you go from 
the other; or as two glasses of water, the one is full while the other 
is empty — the more you pour out of the one into the other the less 
water is left in the first. Thus he who does not realize how insignificant 
and sordid is this world, how closely intermixed are its pains and 
pleasures, and how transient it is, is insane. Whether it be observation 
or experience, both testify to the same conclusion. How then could 
the person who has no brains be numbered among the learned men? 
Again, he who does not realize the greatness and the permanence of 
the hereafter, is an unbeliever lacking all faith. And how could the 
person who has no faith be learned? Any'one who does not realize that 
this world is diametrically opposed to the hereafter and that any 
attempt to reconcile the one with the other is an impossible undertaking, 
is a man ignorant of the laws of the prophets, and still wwse he 
disbelieves the whole Qur'an. How then could he be numbered 
among the company of the learned? Furthermore anyone who knows 
all this, yet does not give the hereafter priority over this world must 
be a prisoner of Satan. His iust has vanquished him and his 
wickedness has triumphed over him. How' then could such a person 
be considered learned? 

Among the traditions of David is the following which he 
related having received it from God. Said God, “The least thing I 
w'ould do with the learned man who w ould neglect My love in favour 
of his lust is to deny him the pleasure of communion ( munajah ) with 
Me.” Addressing David again God said, “Ask not a learned man who 
hath been drunk with the love of this world, about Me lest he blocketh 


150 


151 



The Book of Knowledge 


the road of My love in thy face — such men are highway brigands 
who rob My people. O David! If thou findest one who seekest after 
Me, be thou unto him a servant. 0 David! Whoever leadeth a fleeing 
man back unto Me, the same I shall write down as a man of sound 
judgment; and whomsoever I write down as a man of sound judgment, 
him I shall never torment.” For this reason al-Hasan al-Basri said, 
“The penalty which the learned men receive for seeking the world 
through works which belong to the hereafter is the death of their 
hearts.” For the same reason Yahya ibn-Mu‘adh said, “Knowledge 
and wisdom will lose their glory if through them the world is sought .” 
Sa‘id ibn-al-Musayyab said, “If you see a learned man frequenting 
the houses of rulers you may conclude that he is a thief’ ‘Umar said, 
“If you see the learned cherishing this world, then entrust not your 
religion into his hands because everyone is captivated bv what he 
loves.” 

Malik ibn Dinar 1 said, “I have read in one of the books of the 
ancients that God said, ‘The least thing I would do w ith the learned 
man who has given himself to the love of this world is to remove from 
his heart the pleasure of communion with Me’ .” 2 

A certain man wrote to a brother of his spying, “You have 
been given knowledge; envelop not, therefore, the light of your 
knowledge with the darkness of sin lest you be left behind in darkness 
when the learned go forward with the light of their knowledge. Yahya 
bn-Mu‘adh al-Razi used to say to the learned men of this world, “Ye 
people of knowledge! Your palaces are Caesarian, 3 your homes are 
like those of Chosroes, 4 your doors are Tahirid, 5 your footwear is like 

1. A.H. 131/A.D. 748-9; see Hikyat al-Awliya\ Vol. IL pp. 357-89; ibn- 
Khallikan. Vol. II, on. 202-3. 

2. See supra. 

3 . After Caesar (Ar. Qaysar), the generic name which the Arabs apply to the 
Byzantine emperors. 

4. Ar. Kisra, the generic name which the Arabs apply to Persian monarchs. 

5. Probably after Tahir ibn-al-Husayn dhu-al-Yaminayn (A H. 207/A.D. 
822) As vizir to al-Ma‘mun and as founder of the Tahirid dynasty in 
Khurasan, his doors were inaccessible. Cf. al-Baghdadi, Ta ‘rikh Baghdad, 
Vol. IX, p. 345. For his life see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. 1, pp. 420-24; Ta rikh 
Baghdad , Vol. £X, pp. 353-55. 


The Book of Knowledge 


that of Goliath, 1 your coaches are like those of Qarun, 2 your home 
utensils are Pharaonic, your sins are the same as those of the 
Jahiliyah days, and your beliefs are satanic; where then itf the 
Muhammadan law?” 

A poet said: 

The shepherd keeps the sheep from harm and hurt; 

Who then would keep them safe by day and night 

If they who watch were wolves instead of men? 

Said another. 

Ye learned men of this city of favour. 

What will cure salt which looses its flavour? 

One of the gnostics was one asked, “Do you not think that he 
to whom transgression is attractive does not know God?” To which 
the gnostic replied, “I do not doubt that he who prefers this world to 
the hereafter, does not know God.” This latter thing is by far the 
worse. Furthermore you should not think that the giving up of wealth 
would qualify anyone to join the company of the learned men of the 
hereafter. Glory is more harmful than wealth. For this reason Bishr 
ibn-al-Harith 3 related that a certain Bab 4 once told him: “Whenever 
you hear a man say, 4 We were told, ’ what he really means is, ‘Harken 
unto me’ ” This same Bishr buried over ten 5 baskets full of books 
used to say, “1 have an urge to relate traditions but not until this urge 
subsides will I relate.” He also, as well as others besides him, said. 


1 . Quranic Jalut, Surah 1 1 , 250. 

2. One of the Quranic characters (Surahs XXVIII: 76-82, XXIX: 38, and LX: 
25) Qarun has been identified with Korah of the Bible (Num, XVI). The 
Quranic legend is based upon the Talmudie tradition of Korah s great 
wealth, and appears to be also confused with that of Croesus. See al- 
Th‘ alibi, Oisas al~Anbiya\ pp. 203-207: G.A. Barton. “Korah”, in The 
Jewish Encyclopaedia ; D B. MacDonald, “Karun”, in The Encyclopaedia 
of Islam. 

3. Known also as al-Hafi (A H. 227/A. D. 842). See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I,pp. 
158-160; al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad , Vol. VD, pp. 67-80: 

4. Literally means “door”; a title given by dervishes to their great shaykhs 

5. Cf Tarikh Baghdad , Vol. VIE, p. 7 1 , 1 , 1 4, where the number is eighteen. 


152 


153 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


“If you felt an urge to relate traditions, resist it and keep quite; but 
if you feel no urge, go ahead and relate.” This is because the pleasure 
of the glory of imparting knowledge and of occupying the position of 
a guide is greater than all the joys of this world. Consequently 
whoever should give in to the urge of his lust for such glory, the same 
would be from the children of this w orld. Thus Sufyan al-Thawri 
said, “The temptation to recite a tradition is more insidious than that 
of family or wealth.” How then is it possible for people not to fear 
its temptation? 

The chief of the Apostles was told, “And had We not 
stablished thee, thou hadst well nigh learned to them a little Sad 
Sahl , 2 ‘All knowledge, except that which pertains to the hereafter, 
is of the earth earthly; and all work is in vain except it he sincere. ” 
He also said, “All men are dead except the learned; all learned men 
are in a state of stupefaction except those who practise their 
knowledge; all those who practise their knowledge are conceited 
except those w'hoare sincere; and those who are sincere are constantly 
afraid until they know their fate.” 

Abu-Sulayrnan al-Darani 3 said, “If a man should pursue the 
study of tradition or get married, or travel in search of a living, the 
same has placed his faith in this world.” (By the study of tradition al- 
Darani had in mind the study of singular chains of authorities of (the 
study of traditions which are of no use for the hereafter). Jesus said, 
“How could he who persists in the paths of this world while his 
destination is the hereafter, or he who seeks knowledge in order to 
show' off and not for the sake of following its precepts, be counted 
among the learned ?”' 1 

Salih ibn-Kaysan al-Basri 5 said, “One day I came upon the 

1. Surah, XVD 76. 

2. Abu-Muhammad Sahl ibn-‘Abdullah ibn-Yunus al-Tustari f A H 283/ 
A.D. 896); see ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, p. 389. 

3. A H. 234/A.D. 849-50; see ibn-Khallikan. Vol. I, pp 494-95 Yaqut, 
Buldan, Vol. H, p. 536. 

4. Cf Luke 9: 62. 

5. A.H. 144 A.D. 761; see ibn-Qutaybah, p. 245; Tadhkirat al-Huffuz, 
Vol I, p. 140. 


teachers w'hile they were praying God to save them from evil doers 
who are versed in the law.” Abu-Hurayrah related that the Apostle 
of God once said, “Whoever would seek knowledge with which men 
draw nearto God and would use it to attain some earthly desire would 
not on the day of resurrection find his way to Paradise .” 1 God also 
described the teachers of falsehood as those w ho w ould expend their 
knowledge in order to devour this world and described the learned 
men of the hereafter as humble and ascetic. Thus He said concerning 
the teachers of falsehood, “Moreover, when God entered into a 
covenant with those to whom the Scriptures were given, (and said), 
‘Ye shall surely make it known to men and hide it not, they cast it 
behind their backs, and sold it fora sorry price! Vile is that which they 
purchase .” 2 And concerning the learned men of the hereafter God 
said, “Among the people of the Book are those who believe in God 
and in what hath been sent down to you and in what hath been sent 
down to them, humbling themselves before Him. They barter not His 
signs for a mean price. These! their recompense awaiteth them with 
their Lord .” 3 One of the Fathers said, “On the last day the learned 
men will be judged with the prophets while the judges will be judged 
with the magistrates ” By judges is meant every jurist who intends 
to seek the world through his knowledge. 

Abu-al-Darda’ related that he had heard the Prophet say, 
“God revealed to one of the prophets saying, ‘Say unto those who 
study jurisprudence for a purpose other than religion and to those 
who acquire knowledge for a purpose other than that of doing 
according to it, say unto them that they appear before people in 
sheep’s clothing but inwardly they are raving wolves. Their tongues 
are sweeter than honey but their hearts are more bitter than col >cynth 
They act deceitfully against Me and scorn Me. Verily I shall < nfront 
them with temptations which would confound even the wise M 

Al-Dahhak 5 related on the authority of ibn-‘Abbas that the 

1. Ibn-Majah: Intro., 23: 3. 2. Surah HI: 184. 

3. SHra/iHI: 198-99 4 Cf. Matt. 7: 15, 15: 8. 

5. Porbably ibn-Sulyan, one of the Companions; see Tahdhib al-Asma 

p 321 ’ 


154 


155 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Apostle of God once said, ‘The learned men of this people are two. 
First, he whom God has given knowledge which in fum he freely 
placed at the disposal of his fellowmen, taking from them nothing in 
return and charging no price for it. He shall be blessed by the birds 
of the air, the fish of the sea, the beasts of the earth and by the 
guardian angels' He will, on the day of resurrection, appear before 
God as a noble lord and will join the company of the apostles . Second, 
he whom God has given knowledge which he withheld from his fellow 
men, using it to enrich himself; the same will on the day of- 
resurrection be bridled with a bit of fire while a crier will raise his 
voice among the crowds and say, ‘Behold this man, God gave him 
knowledge but he withheld it from his fellowmen and used it to enrich 
himself. ’ He will continue to be tormented until all men arejudged.” 1 2 
More drastic than this is what has been related concerning a certain 
man who was in the service of Moses and went around saying, 
“Moses, the friend of God, has told me,’ “Moses, the confidant of 
God, has told me,” “Moses the intimate of God, has told me” and 
so on until he became very wealthy. Then he disappeared and Moses 
began to inquire about him in an attempt to find him. Finally there 
came to Moses one day a man leading a pig with a black rope tied to 
its neck. As the man stood before Moses the latter said, “Knowest 
thou such and such a man?” To which the visitor replied, “Yes I do. 
He is this pig.” On seeing that Moses exclaimed, “O God! I beseech 
Thee to transform this creature into his former state in order that I 
may ask him why and how such a thing has come upon him . ” But God 
declared unto Moses in a revelation saying, “Not even if thou callest 
upon Me by what Adam hath called would I grant thy request. 
Nevertheless I shall tell thee why 1 have brought this upon him. It is 
because he was wont to use religion to gain the world.” 

Still more drastic than either is what is related on the authority 
of Mu‘adh ibn-Jaba! who heard the Prophet say, “Among the 
afflictions of the learned manis to prefer talking to listening. Talking 


1. Ar. al-Kiram at Katibun; cf supra, p. 87. They are also known as al- 

Hafazah. 

2. Cf. tbn-Majah, Intro., 24: 1 . 


involves embellishments and accretions, and those given to it are not 
safe from error, while in silence is safety and wisdom.” 

Among the teamed are those who would guard their knowledge 
and dislike the idea of sharing it with others — these will occupy the 
first depth in Hell. There are others who are in the habit of regarding 
their knowledge as equivalent to power and position; and if they are 
ever contradicted or slighted they become infuriated — these will 
occupy the second depth in Hell. Others confine their knowledge to 
the circles of nobility' and wealth and deem the poor classes unworthy 
of it — these will occupy the third depth in Hell. Others appoint 
themselves judges and hand down faulty opinions — these will 
occupy the fourth depth in Hell. Other learned men employ in their 
discourses Jewish and Christian arguments in order to make their 
erudition seem great — these will occupy the fifth depth in Hell. 
Others regard their knowledge as something virtuous and honourable 
and continually dwell on it before men — these will occupy the sixth 
depth in Hell. And finally there are the learned men who are the 
victims of vanity and conceit. Whenever they preach they upbraid, 
and whenever they are admonished they show resentment — these 
will occupy the seventh depth in Hell. Therefore O brother, observe 
silence, for through it you will overcome Satan . Do not laugh without 
cause and do not move without direction. 

According to another tradition we are tolc’ “Verily man may 
possess a reputation extending over East and West; but before God 
it would not amount to the weight of the wing of a mosquito.” 

It has been related that a certain man from Khurasan who had 
attended one of the circles of al-Hasan al-Basr came back after the 
meeting with a bag containing five thousand dinars and ten garments 
of the finest silk and said, ‘0 abu-Sa‘id, here is some pocket money 
and a change of clothes.” In answer al-Hasan said, “May God save 
thee. Gather up the money and thy garments for I have no need for 
either. Verily he who occupies a position like mine and will accept 
from people such things as thou has offered, will on the day of 
resurrection meet God in dishonour.” 


156 


157 





The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


It has also been related on the authority' of Jabir 1 that he heard 
the Apostle of God say, “Do not attend the circle of any learned man 
except him who would call upon you to relinquish five things in 
favour of five others, namely to relinquish doubt in favour of belief 
hypocrisy in favour of sincerity, worldliness in favour of asceticism, 
pride in favour of humility, and enmity in favour of love. 

God said, “And (Qarun) went forth to his people in his pomp 
Those who were greedy for this present life said, ‘Oh that we had the 
like of that which hath been bestowed upon Qarun! Truly he is 
possessed of great good fortune. But they to whom knowledge had 
been given said, ‘Woe to you! The reward of God is better for him 
who believeth’.” 2 Thus God identified the people of learning as those 
who prefer the hereafter to this world. 

Another characteristic expected of learned men is that their 
works should not contradict their words. In fact they should not 
demand anything unless they are ready to be the first to do it. Thus 
God said. “Will ye enjoin what is right upon others, and forget 
yourselves?” 3 And again, “Most hateful is it to God that ye say that 
which ye do not.” 4 God said again in the story of Shu‘ayb, 5 “1 will 
not follow you in that which I myself forbid you.” 6 And again, “But 
fear God and He will give you knowledge.” 1 God also said, “Fear 
God and know...”® and again, “FearGodand hearken.. ,.” 9 Said God 
to Jesus, “O thou son of Mary! Warn thyself and when thou art 
warned, warn the people. Otherwise thou shouldst be ashamed of 
Me.” 10 

The Apostle of God said, “The night I was carried to heaven, 
I passed by several people whose lips were being cut off with scissors 

~ Ibn-'Abdulah al-Ansari, (AH. 78/A.D. 697), see ibn-Qutaybah, pp. 1 56- 

57. 2. Surah, XXVffl: 79-80. 

3. Surah, D: 4 1 . 4. Surah, LXI: 3 

5 One of the prophets menntioned in the Qur’an. See Surahs VII: 83, 86, 88, 

90, sea; XI: 85, 89, 93, 97. XXVI: 177, XXIX: 35. 

6. Surah, XI: 90. 7. Surah, D: 282 

8. Surah, II: 190. 9. Surah, V: 107. 

10. Cf. Luke 4: 23. 


of fire. On asking them who they were, replied, ‘We were learned met 
who were wont to enjoin good but do it not and to forbid evil but 
commit it ourselves’” 1 He also said, “The destruction of my people 
is brought about by a wicked learned man and an ignorant worshipper. 
The worst people are the wicked learned men and the best are the good 
learned men.” 2 

Al-Awza‘i 3 once said, “The sarcophagi 4 of the unbelievers 
complained to God of the stench of the corpses they contain. 
Thereupon God revealed unto them that the stench of the corpses of 
the teachers of falsehood would t>e worse.” Al-Fudayl ibn-‘ Ivad once 
said, “I have been informed that on the day of resurrection the 
wicked learned men will be broughtto judgment before the idolators.” 
Abu-al-Darda’ said, “Woe once to him who doth not know, and woe 
seven times to him who doth know but doth not do accordingly.” Al- 
Sh‘bi also said, “On the day of resurrection a group from the people 
of Paradise will confront a group from the people of Hell and ask 
them, ‘What caused you to be thrown into Hell when we were 
admitted into Paradise through your instruction and teaching?’ To 
which the latter will reply, ‘We were wont to enjoin good but do it not 
and to forbid evil but commit it ourselves’.” 

Hatim al-Asamm 5 said, “No one on the day of resurrection 
would be more sorrowful than he who had taught men knowledge 
which they put in practice and which he himself neglected; consequently 
they were saved through him and he was doomed.” Malik ibn-Dinar 
said, “If he learned man does not do according to his knowledge, his 
words will fail to penetrate the hearts of his hearers just as the dew 
foils to soften the rocks.” 


1 . Cf Hikyat al-Awliva Vol. II, p. 387, 

2. Ibid., Vol. 1, 242. ’ 

3. ‘Abd-al-Rahman ibn-Umar, founder of the Awza'i system in Syria. He 
worked in Beirut and d. A.H. 1 57/A.D. 774. See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, pp. 
492-93. 

4. Ar. nawawis pi. of nawas from Gr. 

5 A.H. 237/A.D. 851-52. See ibn-al-‘Imad al-Hanbali, Shadharat al- 
( Dhahab fiAkhbarman Dhahab (Cairo, 1 350), Vol. II, p. 87; al-Sha‘rani, 
al-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Cairo, 1343), Vol. I, pp. 68-69. 


158 


159 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


The poet said: 

Admonisher of men, thou wouldst be indicted when 

Thou chidest them for that which thou thyself dost do; 
Advice thou givest and then thyself the sin commit 

And scoff the love of life while loving it more than they . 

And another said: 

If thou condemn a sin and then commit 

The same transgression, shame upon thy head 

Ibrahim ibn-Adham' said, “While in Makhah, I came across 
a stone on which was inscribed, “Turn me over and thou shalt have 
warning’. Thereupon I turned it over and lo and behold I found 

inscribed on it, ‘Ifthouactest not according to thy present knowledge, 

why then shouldst thou seek new knowledge’?” Ibn-al-Sammak : 
once said, “Many are they who remind others of God while they 
themselves forget Him; who frighten others of God while they 
trespass against Him; who draw others near to God while they 
themselves are far from Him; who call others unto God while they 
themselves flee from Him; who read God s Holy Books while they 
themselves deviate from His way!” Ibraham ibn-Adham also said, 
“In speech we are always careful to use a language free of error, but 
when it comes to deeds we commit errors and fell short of the ideal 
set before us.” Al-Awza‘i said, “When boasting asserts itself, 
humility disappears.” 

Makhul 3 related that ‘Abd-al-Rahman ibn-Ghanam 4 said, 
“Ten of the Companions of the Apostle of God told me, ‘As we were 
studying one day in the mosque of Quba 5 the Apostle of God came 

1 a.H. 161/A.D. 778; see ibn-‘Asakir, Vol. D (Damascus, 1 330), pp. 1 67- 
96; al-Kutubi, Fawat al-Wafayat (Bulaq, 1283), Vol. I, pp. 3-4. 

2. A.H. 183/A.D. 799. See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. D,pp. 296-97. 

3 Al-Shami. (A.H. 1 1 3/A.D 731). Seeibn-Qutaybah.p. 230, ibn-Khallikan, 

Vol. D, pp. 585-86. He is also known sa al-Dimashqi. 

4. A.H. 78/A.D. 697, see ibn-Sa‘d, Vol. VD, Pt. 2, p. 152; Tadhkirat al- 
Huffaz Vol. 1, p. 48. 

5. A village two milies south-east of al-Madinah. Its mosque is celebrated in 
Islam and is said to have been the mosque of piety ( al-taqwa ). 


upon us and said: You may study whatever you wish, but God will 
not reward you unless you do according to that knowledge’ Jesus 
said, “The parable of him who acquires knowledge but does not 
accordingly, is like the parable of the woman who has secretly 
committed adultery and, on becoming pregnant, her sin becomes 
known. So it is with him who does not do according to his knowledge; 
on the day of resurrection he will be openly disgraced by God.” 
Mu‘adh ibn-Jabal said, “Beware of the learned man’s error, which 
because of the exalted position of its perpetrator, is emulated by 
men.” ‘Umar said, “Through the error of a learned man a whole 
people may be led to error.” “Three things will bring about the end 
of time; one of these three is the error of the learned man.” Ibn- 
Mas‘ud said, “There will come a time wherein the sweetness of 
hearts will become salty. At that time neither he who possesses 
knowledge nor he to whom it is imparted will reap any benefit 
therefrom. The hearts of the learned men will be like the saline land; 
the rains of heaven will fall upon it but foil to make it fresh.” This 
will take place when the hearts of learned men incline after the love 
of this world and give it preference over the hereafter. Then will God 
rob men of the springs of wisdom and will extinguish the lights of the 
true feith in their hearts. When you meet the learned among them he 
will protest before you his fear of God while trespassing and sin are 
evident in his deeds. How fat then are die tongues and how lean the 
hearts. Verily, by God — there is none but He — this would not have 
been so if the teachers had taught for the sake of God and the students 
had studied for His sake.” 

The following is written in both the Bible and the Gospel, 
“Seek no new knowledge unless you have put into practice what you 
already know.” Hudhayfah 1 2 said, ‘You are in a time wherein 
anyone who will neglect a tenth of his knowledge will surely perish; 
but the time will come wherein anyone who will put into practice a 
tenth of his knowledge, the same will be saved because the idle are 

numerous.” 

1. Hikyal al-Awliva ' , Vol. I, p. 236. 

1. Ibn-al-Yaman al-Sahabi (A.H. 36/A.D. 657). See ibn-Qutaybah, 

pp 1 34-3:' 


160 


12 


161 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


What is true of the teamed men is true of the judges 
concerning whom the Prophet said, “There are three kinds of judges: 
One judges justly with knowledge; the same will inherit Paradise. 
Another judges unjustly whether or not he has knowledge; the same 
will roast in Hell fire. A third judges contrary to the ordinances of 
God; the same will also roast in Hell fire.” 1 K‘ab 2 said, “At the end 
of time there will be learned men who will urge people to abjure this 
world while they themselves renounce it not; they place the fear of 
God in the hearts of men while they themselves fear Him not; they 
forbid men to seek the favour of thpse in authority while they 
themselves curry favour with them; they prefer this world to the 
hereafter, slander everyone, associate with the rich and avoid the 
company of the poor, they are jealous of one another concerning 
knowledge and fight over it as women fight over the love of men; the 
anger of one of them is aroused if his companion would talk to 
another besides himself. Verily they are the enemies of the Merciful 
One.” 

The Prophet said, “Verily Satan may bait you with 
knowledge.” When asked how would that be, Muhammad replied 
that Satan would say to you, “Seek ye knowledge and do nothing 
until ye master it.” Then will man continue to seek knowledge and 
defer action until he finally dies having done nothing. 

Sirri al-Saqti said, “A certain man who was overzealous in 
mastering all esoteric knowledge suddenly withdrew from the world 
and devoted his life to worship. Thereupon 1 asked him why he had 
done so. To which he replied, “I saw in a dream someone say unto 
me, ‘How long will you persist in wasting knowledge?’ I replied, 
‘Verily I shall study and preserve it.’ He said, ‘The preservation of 
knowledge lies in putting it into practice. ’Consequently I dropped 
seeking knowledge and bent myself on work and action. ” Ibn Mas ‘ ud 


1 . Al-Tirmidhi, al-Ahkam, 1 ; ibn-Majah , al-Ahkam, 3. 

2. Al-Ahbar (A H 32/A.D. 652-3). See ibn-Qutaybah, p. 2 1 9; M. Schmitz, 

art. “K'ab al-Ahbar” in Encyclopaedia of Islam. 


said, “Knowledge is not the prolific retention of tradition, but rather 
the fear of God.” 1 

Al-Hasan al-Basri said, “You may study whatever you wish, 
but God will not reward you unless you do according to that 
knowledge. Verily the concern of the insolent is the retention of 
tradition and that of the learned men is wisdom.” Malik ibn-Anas 
said, “Verily the seeking of knowledge as well as the imparting of it 
is good, provided the intentions are also good. Above all seek your 
daily provision of knowledge and let nothing else interfere.” Ibn- 
Mas‘ud said, “The Qur‘an was revealed in order that men may direct 
their lives according to its teaching. But instead you have made the 
study of it your life work. There will also come a time when some will 
attempt to modify it — these are not the worthy among you”. The 
learned man who does net do according to his knowledge is like a sick 
man who prescribes treatment for others, or like a hungry and half 
starved man who works out delicious menus of food but cannot taste 
them. Describing a similar thing God said, “But woe be unto you for 
what ye utter (of God).’” And according to a tradition the Prophet 
said. Of the dangers which threaten my people I fear nothing 
except the error of the learned man and a hypocrite discussing the 
Qur’an.” 3 

Another characteristic expected of the learned man is that he 
be concerned with the acquisition of knowledge, useful in the 
hereafter and conducive to good work (to ‘al). He should avoid those 
branches of knowledge which are of little use and which lend 
themselves to disputation and argument. Thus he who shuns the 
science of practical religion and takes to disputation is like a sick man 
suffering from many diseases who meets a clever physician, and 
despite the fact that the time is precious and limited, he wastes it in 
inquiring about the properties of drugs and medicines and about the 
curiousities of the medical profession and neglects the all important 
question of his own affliction. This certainly is tbe limit of insolence. 

1 . Hikyat al-Awilya „ Vol. I, p. 131. 

2. Surah XXI: 18 

3. Cf. al-Darimi, Intro., 23. 


162 


163 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


It has been related that a certain man came to the Apostle of 
God and said, “Teach me some of the strange facts of knowledge.” 
To which the Apostle replied, “What hast thou done with the 
beginning of knowledge?” “But what is the beginning of 
i nowledge?” the man retorted. The Prophet replied, “Hast thou 
known the exalted Lord?” “Y es”, said the man . “And what hast thou 
done for Him?” “Oh well,” replied the man. “And has thou know 
what death is?” added the Prophet. “Yes”, replied the man. “And 
what hast thou prepared for it?” Inquired the Prophet, “Oh well, 
protested the man. Thereupon the Prophet said, “Go thou first and 
do these things and then come and we shall teach thee some of the 
strange facts of knowledge.” 

The knowledge acquired should be like that which Hatim al- 
Asamm, the disciple of Shaqiq al-Balkhi 1 learned from his teacher. 
Thus it is said that Shaqiq once asked Hatim how long he had been 
in his company. Hatim replied, “Thirty-three years.’ Shaqiq then 
said, “And what have you leamt during this period?” “Eight 
things,” replied Hatim. Thereupon Shaqiq exclaimed, “Verily we 
are God’s and unto Him is our return. I have spent my life trying to 
teach you but vou have leamt only eight things! Hatim replied, 
“Frankly I have leamt nothing else and I do not like to lie about it,” 
Shaqiq then said, ‘Well, out with these things and let me hear them. ” 
Hatim then said, “I looked around and beheld that every man has 
something or someone whom lie loves and with whom he remains 
jntil the hour of death arrives, at which time they part. Consequently 

1 made charity the object of my love so that when the hour of death 
arrives the object of my love accompanies me to the grave.” “Thou 
hast done well, Hatim,” said Shaqiq, “let us now hear the second 
thing thou hast leamt ” Hatim replied, “I have pondered over the 
words of God when he said, ‘But as to him who shall have feared the 
majesty of the Lord, and shall have refrained his soul from lust, 
verily. Paradise — that shall be his dwelling plac e,’ : and have come 

|. According to ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, p. 404, Shaqiq, died in A.H. 153/A.D 

770; while according to ibn-al-‘ Imad al-Hanbali, Shadharat al-DhahabJi 
Akhbar man Dliahab (Cairo, 1 350), Vol. I, p. 34 1 , he died in A.H. 1 94/ 
A D. 810 

2 Surah, LXXDC: 40-t I . 

I6J 


to know that the words of God are the truth. Consequently I have 
mortified myself and suppressed lust until my soul found its abode 
in the obedience of God. Thirdly, as I looked around the people I 
found that everyone treasures and exalts whatever valuable things he 
possesses. I then turned to the words of God, ‘All that ye possess 
passeth away but that which is with God abideth’, 1 and began to give 
unto God whatever valuable things fell into my hands. Fourthly, as 
1 looked around I saw that everyone places his trust in wealth, 
descent, honour, and lineage — things which on examination I found 
to be empty. I then pondered over the words of God, ‘Verily the most 
honourable of you in the sight of God is the most pious of you, ’ 2 and 
immediately turned with all my soul to piety in order that I may 
become honourable before God. 

“Fifth, I looked around and beheld these people slandering 
and cursing one another, all because of jealousy. Then I turned to the 
words of God, ‘It is We who distribute their subsistence among them 
in this world’s life,’ 3 and consequently I abjured jealousy and 
extended my love to all realizing that man’s lot is from God. As a 
result I dislike people no more. 

“In the sixth place, I saw men oppress and fight one another. 
Whereupon I turned to the words of God, ‘Verily Satan is your foe; 
for a foe then hold him.’ 4 Accordingly I took Satan for a foe and 
ceased to hate people. 

“The seventh thing I leamt was the following; As I looked 
around I saw that everyman was running after bread, and debasing 
himself and committing all manner of unlawful things in the effort to 
gain his end. Then I recalled the words of God, ‘There is no moving 
thing that moveth upon the face of the earth but its provision is from 
Me’. 5 Realizing that I was one of those moving things whos< 
provision is from God, I devoted myself to the things which ar 
God’s, and entrusted my fate into His hands. 

T. Surah, XVI: 98. 2. Surah, XLIX: 13. 

3 Surah, XLHI31. 4. Surah, XXXV: 6 

5. Surah, XI: 8. 


165 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


“The eighth thing which I learnt was this: I looked around and 
found that every man has placed his trust in something created — one 
in his possessions and another in his wealth, a third in his profession 
and the fourth in his health. In short all created beings placed their 
faith in things which are like themselves created. I then turned to the 
words of God, ‘And to him who putteth his trust in Him will God be 
all-sufficient ,’ 1 and from that moment on I placed my trust in God, 
verily He is all-sufficient ” 

Then Shaqiq said, “O Hatim, may God prosper thee. Verily 
I have examined the Pentateuch, the Gospels, the Psalms, and the 
great Qur’an and found that all goodness and religion centre around 
these eight things; whoever would practise them would conform to 
the teachings of these four books.” 

No one bothers about the acquisition of this type of knowledge 
or even acknowledges its existence except the learned men of the 
hereafter; while the learned men of this world apply themselves to 
those branches of knowledge which help to gain for them wealth and 
position, neglecting all the knowledge which God sent the Prophets 
with to impart in this world. 

Al-Dahhak ibn-Muzahim 2 once said, “When I was young the 
learned men used to teach one another piety, but nowadays they learn 
nothing but scholastic wrangling ( kalam ).” 

Another characteristic expected of the learned man is that he 
be not disposed to indulgence in his food and drink, and luxury' in his 
dress, furniture, and housing. Rather he should prefer economy in all 
things, emulating thereby the blessed Fathers. He should be more 
readily satisfied with the least of everything, and the closer he draws 
to penury' the closer he draws to God and the greater will his rank be 
among the learned men of the hereafter. This is attested by the story 
related about Ibrahim al-Khawwas 3 who was a friend of Hatim al- 

\. Surah, L XV: 3. 

2. A.H. 102/A.D. 720-21; see ibn-Qutaybah, p. 232. 

3 A H. 29 l/A.D. 904; see al-Baghdadi, 7anA7» Baghdad, Vol. VI, pp 7- 1 0. 

al-Sha‘rani, Vol. I, pp 83-84. 

166 


Asamm Said Ibrahim “Once upon a time I and three hundred and 
twenty pilgrims arrived at al-Rayy in the company of Hatim. We 
were all headed to Makkah for die pilgrimage. The men had their 
woollen cloaks but lacked both provisions and provision bags. On 
arriving at al-Rayy we came upon a merchant of abstemious habits 
who loved the poor and therefore offered us shelter and food for the 
night. In the morning our host asked Hatim whether or not he had 
anything to do because he wanted to call on a certain sick jurist in the 
town. Hatim replied ‘Visiting the sick is meritorious, and hearkening 
unto the learned is a form of worship. I shall therefore accompany 
you.’ The sick jurist was Muhammad ibn Muqatil , 1 the judge of al- 
Rayy. As they arrived at the gate of his mansion they beheld a great 
and imposing palace. This made Hatim wonder and say (to himself), 

‘ Such a palace is the property of a learned man ! ” On being admitted 
they entered the palace and lo, they were in the midst of an imposing 
wide, and spacious house with luxurious curtains and draperies. But 
Hatim still wondered. They then stepped into the hall in which the 
patient lay on a soft mattress. Over his head stood a lad waving a fan. 
While Hatim remained standing the merchant sat down beside ibn- 
Muqatil and inquired about his condition. Noticing that Hatim was 
still standing, ibn-Muqatil motioned him to take a seat but Hatim 
declined. Ibn-Muqatil then inquired whether or not Hatim wanted 
anything done for him, to which Hatim replied, ‘Yes I wish to ask you 
a question.’ ‘Ask’, said ibn-Muqatil. Hatim replied, ‘Sit up that I 
may ask thee.’ Ibn Muqatil sat up’and Hatim proceeded to ask him 
saying, ‘From where did you get your learning?’ ‘From trustworthy 
reporters who related their knowledge to me directly, said ibn- 
Muqatil. ‘And wherefrom did they get theirs?’ asked Hatim. ‘From 
the Companions of the Apostle of God,’ replied ibn-Muqatil. And 
wherefrom did the Companions get theirs?’ asked Hatim. From the 
Apostle of god,’ replied ibn-Muqatil. ‘And the Apostle?’ inquired 
Hatim. ‘From Gabriel who got his from God,’ replied ibn-Muqatil. 
‘Tell me then,’ said Hatim, ‘in that which Gabriel received from God 
and transmitted to the Apostle who in turn passed it on to his 


1 . Unidentified. 

167 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Companions who conveyed it to trustworthy reporters who in turn 
gave it to you, did you hear of any learned men who advanced in 
worth before God because he led a life of luxury in his house and 
because his wealth exceeded that of a prince?’ ‘No’, said ibn- 
Muqatil . ‘What have you learnt then from those trustworthy reporters?’ 
asked Hatim. To this ibn Muqatil replied, ‘I have learnt that he who 
renounces this world and seeks the next, showing love to the poor and 
preparing for the hereafter, will be favoured by God.’ Hatim then 
exclaimed, ‘The example of whom have you followed, that of the 
Prophet and his Companions and their virtuous followers or that of 
Pharaoh 1 and Namrud , 2 the first to employ gypsum and bricks in 
masonry? Y ou teachers of falsehood, the ignorant man who is rabidly 
desirous of the pleasures of this world would see you and those of 
your kind and would say to himself that if the learned men lead such 
a life, there is no reason why he should not do the same. ’ Having said 
this, Hatim left, and ibn-Muqatil’s sickness became more acute. The 
details of the incident soon spread among the people of al-Rayy and 
they informed Hatim that al-Tanafisi 3 in Qazwin was more 
extravagant. Hearing this Hatim proceeded to Qazwin and on his 
arrival, called on al-Tanafisi and addressed him saying, ‘May God 
have mercy upon you. Sir; I am a non-Arab ( a ‘jami) who wishes you 
would teach me the elements of my religion and the commencement 
of my prayer, namely, how to perform the ceremonial of ablution 
preparatory to worship.'' Al-Tanafisi rose up (to demonstrate the 
ceremonial) while Hatim watched. Al-Tanafisi performed the 
ablution applying water thrice to those parts of his body which, 
according to the ritual, should be washed, and told Hatim to perform 
the ceremonial in the same way. Hatim then said, ‘Could you please 
stay where you are until I perform the ceremonial before you and thus 

1 . Cf. Surahs XXVII: 38, LX: 38; see also al-Tabari, Jami ’ al Bayan (Cairo 
1323-30), Vols. XX, p. 49, XXIV, p. 43, where Pharaoh is said to have 
been the first to use mortar and brick in masonry. 

2. Al-Tabari, Vol. 1, pp.217,219, 220,252-65,319-25;al-Tha‘alibi,pp. 68- 
70; Bernard Heller, art. “Namrud” in Encyclopaedia of Islam. 

3. Probably abu-‘ Abdullah Muhammad ibn-Ubayd ibn-abi-Umayyah, ( A.H. 
204/A.D. 819-20); see ibn-S'ad, Vol. VI, p. 277; Tadhkiral al-Huffaz ; 
Vol. l,pp 304-5 

168 


be sure I have learnt it correctly?’ Thereupon al-Tanafisi moved 
aside and Hatim proceeded with his ablution. When he got to the 
washing of his arms up to the elbows he applied water four times . Al- 
Tanafisi who was watching protested saying, ‘You have been 
extravagant.’ ‘In what respect,’ inquired Hatim. ‘In washing your 
arms four times,’ was the reply. ‘Great God!’ exclaimed Hatim, ‘for 
the use of an extra handful of water you think I have been 
extravagant; but your indulgence in all this luxury you do not 
consider to be extravagance! ’ Al-Tanafisi then realized that Hatim’s 
real purpose was to reprimand rather than to learn. He consequently 
locked himself up in his home and saw no one for forty days” 

When later Hatim entered Baghdad, its inhabitants came to 
him and said, “O abu-‘Abd al-Rahman, you are a stammering non- 
Arab, yet no one ever talks to you without being silenced. Hatim 
replied, “Three characteristics enable me to overcome my adversary: 

I rejoice when he is right, grieve when he is wrong, and endeavour not 
to act foolishly towards him.” When Ahmad ibn-Hanbal heard this, 
he said, “Allah be praised; how great is the wisdom of this man! 
Come let us call on him.” When the company got to his house, ibn- 
Hanbal addressed him saying, “O abu-‘ Abd-al-Rahman, what will 
insure salvation from this world?” Hatim replied, “You will not be 
saved until you possess four characteristics: Overlook men’s ignorance 
and spare them vours; give them from you substance and except 
nothing from theirs. Not unless you do these will you be saved.” 

“He then proceeded to al-Madinah where he was welcomed by 
its inhabitants. Addressing them he said, ‘which city is this?’ They 
replied, ‘The city of the Apostle of God.’ He then asked, ‘Where is 
the palace of the Apostle of God so that I might go and worship in it?’ ‘ 
‘He had none,’ they replied, ‘all he had was a modest house half 
buried in the ground. ’ Where then are the palaces of his Companions? ’ 
‘They had none either,’ was the reply, ‘all they had were modest 
houses half buried in the ground. ’ Thereupon Hatim said, ‘ Men, this, 
then, is the city of Pharaoh.’ Infuriated they brought him before the 
governor and said, ‘This foreigner says that this is the city of 
Pharaoh.’ The governor asked Hatim why he had said such a thing 

169 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


and the latter replied, ‘Be patient with me please. I am a foreigner, 
a stranger in this city. When I arrived in it I inquired whose city it was 
and was told that it was the city of the Apostle of God. I then asked 
where his palace was? Hatim then recalled the whole story and in 
conclusion quoting the words of God, ‘Ye had in the Apostle of God 
a good example,’ 1 said, ‘Whoseexamplehaveyou then followed, that 
of the Apostle of God or that of Pharaoh, the first to employ gypsum 
and brick in masonry?’ Hearing that, they released him and let him 
a!one.”This then is the story of Hatim al-Asamm. Other stories from 
the lives of the Fathers concerning their disregard for physical 
comforts and the use of ornaments will be related in due course. 

The truth of the matter is that the use of permissible things for 
ornament is not unlawful although its practice develops a fondness 
for it which is hard to undo. Persistence in it is not possible except 
through practices which will inevitably lead to committing sins such 
as adu lation, compromise, and hypocrisy as well as to other p rohibited 
offenses. It is, therefore, wise to avoid these things because whoever 
indulges in the luxuries of this world would never be safe. Had safety 
been compatible with indulgence in luxury, the Prophet would not 
have been insistent on renouncing this world and all its pleasures even 
to the extent of taking off the embroidered shirt 2 and removing the 
gold seal-ring whenever he delivered a sermon (khutbah)? which 
thing will be discussed later. 

It has been related that Yahya ibn-Yazid al Nawfali 4 once 
wrote to Malik ibn-Anas saying: 

“In the name of God the Merciful the Compassionate. 

May His blessing be on His Apostle Muhammad. 

From Yahya ibn-Yazid ibn-‘Abd-al-Malik to Malik ibn- 

Anas: 

I have been informed that you wear fine clothes, eat choice 

1. Surah, XXXIII: 21. 

2. Ibn-Sa’d, Vol. I, pt. 2, p. 152. 

3. Ibid, Vol. I, Pt. 2, pp. 160-61. 

4. A H. 165/A.D. 781-82; see al-Sam'ani, p. 571 a-b. 

170 


food, recline on comfortable couches, and station at your door 
chamberlains. At the same time you have assumed the seat of 
learning and men have come to you from every direction, selecting 
you as their imam and accepting your pronouncements as the final 
word. Fear then God and humble yourself. I have written to you this 
letter of advice. No one besides God has seen its contents. Peace be 
with you.” 

Malik wrote back saying: 

“In the name of God the Merciful the Compassionate. May 
His blessing be on Muhammad, our Lord, and on His Companions. 

From Malik ibn-Anas to Yahya ibn-Yazid: 

The peace of God be upon you. 

“I have received vour letter which 1 accept as the token of your 
interest and sympathy, and as the evidence of your refined character . 
May God bless your piety and reward and prosper you for your 
advice. I seek the help of God; there is no strength nor power but in 
Him. 

“As to your charge that we eat choice food, wear fine clothes, 
station chamberlains at our door, and recline on comfortable couches, 
may we state that at times we do all these but usually beg the 
forgiveness of God. May we, however, add that God said in His 
Book, ‘Say: What hath prohibited God’s goodly raiment, and the 
healthful viands which He hath provided for His servants?” 1 
Furthermore we know' very well that abstinence from these things is 
better than indulgence in them. At any rate do not neglect us in the 
matter of writing and we shall not forget you. Peace be with you.” 
See, then, the sense of justice which Malik displayed: he admitted that 
to abstain from these things w'as better than indulgence in them, vet 
at the same time he handed down the opinion that they were 
permissible, and he w as right in both. Thus it may be possible for men 
of the calibre of Malik, whose sense of justice enabled him to admit 
the fairness of such advice, to confine themselves to that which is 


1 . Surah VD: 30. 

171 



The Book of Knowledge 


permissible without either hypocrisy or deception and without 
overstepping their bounds and doing that which is reprehensible. But 
this is not possible for others, because to flirt with luxury in those 
things which are permissible is extremely dangerous. It is far 
removed from the fear of God which is the quality of the learned men 
of God. Characteristic of the fear of God, however, is to avoid all 
manner of risk. 

Another characteristic expected of the learned man is that he 
keeps away from the magistrates and, as long as he can help it, not 
to come near them at all, and rather avoid their company despite any 
efforts on their part to seek him out, because the world is attractive 
and inviting while the power to dispense with its riches is in their 
hands. To associate with them, therefore, would necessarily involve 
the learned man in seeking their approval and winning their hearts, 
although they are unjust and unrighteous. It is, then, the duty of every' 
religious man to censor them by exposing their tyranny and decrying 
their practices. For he who frequents their palaces will either seek 
their favour and consequently forget the blessings which God has 
bestowed upon him, or hold his peace and allow their misdeeds to go 
uncensored, thereby courting their favour. He may also undertake to 
justify their sins and improve their standing in order to gain their 
pleasure, which is the limit in perjury and falsehood. Or he may hope 
to share their luxury, which is downright lawlessness. (A discussion 
of what is permissible to accept from the riches of magistrates and 
what is not permissible, especially such things as jobs and rewards, 
will be taken up in the Book on the Lawful and the Unlawful). In 
short, their company is a source of evil and it is, therefore, necessary 
for the learned men of the hereafter to be careful and beware. 

The Prophet said, “He who goeth out to the desert to live 
becometh hardy and he who devoteth himself to the chase becometh 
unmindful, while he who frequenteth the company of magistrates is 
led astray . 1 And again, “Ye will have rulers some of whom ye will 
find out and then reject. He that rejecteth them will be acquitted and 

1 . Al-Tirmidhi, Fitan, 69. 


\.%The Book of Knowledge 


he that abhorreth them will be saved. But he that approveth of their 
ways and followeth their example will be rejected by God.” “Shall 
we then fight them?” the Prophet was asked. “No”, he replied, “not 
as long as they pray .” 1 

Sufyan al Thawri said, “There is in hell a valley which is not 
inhabited except by the Qur’an readers who frequent the palaces of 
the king .” Hudhayfah said, “Expose not yourselves to temptation! ” 
He was then asked. “What temptation?” “The gates of the rulers,” 
he replied, “into which you enter giving your approval to their lies 
and praising them for virtues they do not possess.” 

The Apostle of God also said, “As long as the learned men 
associate not with the rulers, they are the deputies of the Apostles of 
God over His servants. But when they associate with rulers they 
betray the Apostles. Beware, therefore, of them and avoid them. 
(This tradition was related by Anas). 

Al-A’mash was once told, “You have revived knowledge 
through your many disciples.” But he said, “Wait! One-third of 
these disciples pass away before its knowledge matures; another, 
which hangs around the gates of the rulers, is the worst of all men; 
while of the remainder only a few succeed.” For this reason S‘aid 
ibn-al-Musavyab said, “If you see a learned man frequent the 
houses of the rulers, beware of him because he is a thief.” Al-Awza‘i 
said, “There is nothing more hateful to God than a learned man who 
frequents the house of a governor. 

The Apostle of God also said, “The worst learned men 
frequent the houses of the rulers while the best rulers frequent the 
houses of the learned men.” Makhul al-Dimashqi said, “He who has 
studied the Qur’an and mastered the science of religion yet 
associates with rulers and flatters them for gain will wade through a 
sea of fire in the midst of hell and will cross in that flaming sea as 
many steps as he had taken in the company of rulers.” 


173 


172 


1 


Al-Tayalisi, No. 1 595. 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Samnun 1 once said, “How stupid is the learned man who is 
continually sought for in his circle but is never found there; and when 
the caller inquires about his whereabouts he is said to be at the 
governor’s house.” He also said, “I often heard it said that whenever 
it is discovered that a learned man is fond ofthis world, people should 
immediately suspect the sincerity of his religion. Finally I began to 
do the same myself, so that henceforth I never called on a governor 
without taking myself to task for it on my leaving him; 1 usually found 
that I was to blame despite the face that, as you well know, I have 
always confronted him with rude and harsh words and repeatedly 
contradicted his wishes. Still more I had hoped to be spared 
altogether the humiliation of calling on him, although I have received 
nothing, not even a drink of water, from him.” Continuing, Samnun 
said, ‘Nevertheless the learned men of our time are even worse than 
the learned men of Israel: they tender the ruler cheap advice and tell 
him the thing which would please. Were they to remind him of his 
obligations and of the things wherein lies his salvation, he would have 
found them boring, and would have disliked their visits to him. Yet 
this would have been their own salvation before the Lord.” 

Al-Hasan al-Basri said, “There lived before your time a man 
who had embraced Islam at a very early date and who had enjoyed 
the company of the Apostle.” (‘Abdullah ibn-al-Mubarak held that 
al-Hasan al-Basri had in mind S‘ad ibn abi-Waqqas). “He did not 
frequent the company of governors; on the contrary he avoided them 
altogether. And so one day his sons pointed out to him that men whose 
Islam was not as old as his and who, unlike himself, did not enjoy the 
company of the Prophet, frequent the company of governors, and 
asked him why he did not do the same. He replied and said, ‘0 my 
sons! Shall I go and stand by a stinking corpse surrounded by men? 
By God! If I can help it 1 shall never join them ’ Then his sons said, 
‘We shall then die of starvation, father.’ To which he replied, ‘I 
would rather starve to death as a believer than die as a fat 
hypocrite’.” AJ-Hasan then remarked, ‘By God he beat them, 

1 . Abu-al-Qasim Samnun ibn-Hamzah, died before A. H. 297/A. D. 909- 1 0; 

see al -Baghdadi, Tarikh. Baghdad , Vol. DC, pp. 234-37. 

174 


because he had realized that beneath the sod, the flesh and the fat of 
the man rather than his beliefs, decay.” This implies that those who 
frequent the company of governors can never escape hypocrisy 
which is contrary to faith and beliefs. 

Abu-Dharr once said to Salamah; 1 “O Salamah, frequent not 
the company of rulers because you get nothing of their wealth without 
their robbing you of something better of your religion.” As a matter 
of fact this constitutes a great temptation which confronts learned 
men and places in the hand of Satan a terrible instrument which he 
can use against them, especially in the case of the learned man who 
has a pleasing voice and an attractive speech. Satan persists in 
whispering in his ear that through his preaching and visits to them he 
may be able to turn them away from injustice and to induce them to 
observe the dictates of the law, until finally the learned man imagines 
that his visits to governors are an integral part of religion. However, 
no sooner does he call on the governors than he begins to pay them 
compliments and flatter them with praise and eulogy, wherein lies the 
destruction of religion. Thus it is said that when the true learned men 
acquire know ledge they go to work accordingly and when they go to 
work they become absorbed in their work, and when they become 
absorbed in their work they lose their interest in this world, and when 
they lose interest in this world they seek the way of God, and when 
they seek the way of God they turn their back and flee from the world. 

‘ Umar ibn-‘ Abd al-‘ Aziz wrote to al Hasan saying, “Peace be 
upon you. Recommend to me some on whom I can call for aid to 
enforce the ordinances of God.” Al-hasan replied, “The people of 
religion will have nothing to do with you, and of the people of this 
world you will have none. Seek, therefore, the noble for they will 
not dishonour themselves by committing treason. ” If it is the duty of 
the people of religion to stand aloof even from such a ruler as ‘ Umar 
ibn-‘ Abd-al-‘ Aziz who was the greatest ascetic of his time, how then 
can it be fitting for them to seek and associate with other rulers? 

1. Ibn-al-Akwa’, (A.H. 74/A.D. 693-94): see ibn-Qutaybah, p. 615; ibn- 

Sa d, Vol. IV, Pt. 2, pp. 38-41. 

175 



The Book of Knowledge 


The earlv learned men, such as al-Hasan al-Basri, al-Thawri, 
ibn-al-Mubarak, al-Fuadayl , 1 Ibrahim ibn-Adham, and Yusuf ibn- 
Asbat : , repeatedly censored the learned men of this world, both 
Makkans and Syrians, either for their fondness for this world or for 
associating with rulers. 

Another characteristic expected of the learned man is that he 
not be impatient to give his opinion but on the contrary, whenever 
possible, think twice and be extremely careful. Only when he is asked 
about something which he knows to be explicitv expressed in the 
Qur’an or tradition, or definitely accepted by catholic consent 
(,y ma Tor analog} (qiyas), should hegive his opinion. Butwhenever 
he is confronted with something about which he has some doubt, he 
should say, “I do not know”. If he is asked about something on which 
he has formed an opinion through independent interpretation ( ijtihad) 
and speculation ( lakhmin ), he should be careful not to commit 
himself but refer the question to someone else who is more capable 
than himself. This is wisdom itself because the danger of undertaking 
independent interpretation is very great. 

According to one tradition. “Knowledge comprises three 
parts: the expressed word of the Qur’an, the observed Usage of the 
Prophet, and finally a great deal which I do not know .” 3 Al-Sh‘abi 
said, “I do not possess even the half of all knowledge.” Therefore 
the reward of him who will abstain from speech where he does not 
know out of respect to God will not be less than that of him who will 
speak where he knows, because to confess one’s ignorance is the 
most difficult thing for man to do. Yet this was the custom of the 
Companions and the Fathers. Thus whenever ibn-‘Umar was asked 
to give an opinion on anything he used to say. Go unto the governor 
in whose hand are the affairs of men and place the responsibility upon 
him.” Ibn-Mas‘ud said, “He who would express an opinion on even 

1 Ibn-‘Iyad, (A ll. 1 87/A.D. 803); see ibn-Qutaybah, p. 256. 

2 Died after A H. 1 90/A.D. 806, see al-Fihrist, p. 184; al-Sha‘rani, Vol. I, 

pp. 52-53. 

3 Cf ibn-Sfajah , Intro * 8. 


176 


The Book of Knowledge 


question put to him is truly mad.” And again, “The refuge of the 
learned man lies in the words ‘I do not know.’ Whenever he abandons 
this refuge he will be bested.” Ibrahim ibn-Adham said. There is 

nothing more formidable to Satan than the learned man who, in both 

speech and silence, manifests his knowledge. Of him Satan would 
say, ‘Behold his silence is more formidable than his speech 

Someone, describing the abdal,' said, “Only when gnawed by 
the pangs of hunger do they eat; only when overcome by lack of 
sleep do they rest; and only when the need for speech is imperative 
do they speak.” In other words they do not speak unless they are 
asked and even then they will not talk if they could find someone to 
answer for them. If it should become imperative for them to speak 
they will open their mouths and reply. They considered the practice 
of starting to speak before being asked a manifestation of a latent lust 
for flourish. 

As ‘ Ali and ‘Abdullah ibn-‘ Abbas once passed by a man who 
was addressing a crowd they said, “This man is saying: ‘Know me 
O ye people.” Someone has said that to ask the true learned man a 
question is as difficult as the extraction of one of his molar teeth. Ibn- 
‘Umar used to say, “Do you wish to use us as a bridge by which you 
could cross over to Hell?” Abu-Hafs al-Naysabun 2 once said. The 
true learned man is he who, when asked a question, would hesitate to 
reply lest he be told on the day of resurrection, ‘From whence have 

7 Also budaia’ , sing, "bidi, badal and ~Badil. A degree in the Sufi hierarchical 

order of saints, who, unknown to the masses, participate by means of their 
powerful influence in the preservation of the arrangement of the u™verse^ 
Others hold that the abdal are certain righteous men of whom the world 
is never destitute; when one dies, God substitutes another in his place. 
They are seventy in number, forty of whom are in Syria and thirty in other 
countries. Still another group holds that they are subsidies for an 
successors of the prophets and are seven in number. Through them God 
takes care of the seven climates. They are respectively the successors of 
Abraham, Moses, Aaron, Idris (Enoch). Joseph, tens ,, and AdimSee 
T'arifat, p. 44; Diet, of Tech. Tetms. pp. 164-48; I goldzihei -art. Abdal 
in Encyclopaedia of Islam. Cf. also Kashfal-Mahjub, P *14. 

2. ‘Umar^ ibm-Salim al-Haddad, (A.H. 270/A.D. 8834); see al-Sha ram, 

Vol. 1,70-71. 


13 


177 


The Book of Knowledge 


you answered the questions (which were put to you)?”’ Whenever 
he was asked a question, Ibrahim al-Taymi 1 used to weep and say, 
“Is it because you could find no one else that you seek me?” 

Abu-aKAliyah al-Riyahi , 2 Ibrahim ibn-Adham, and Sufyan 
al-Thawri used to carry on discussions with two or three men or 
thereabout, but the moment the number increased beyond that they 
would stop their discussion and depart. 

The Apostle once said, 4t I do not know whether ‘Uzavr 3 was 
a prophet or not: nor whether Tubba 4 5 was accused or not; nor do I 
know whether dhul-al-Qamayn s was a prophet or not.” And when he 
was asked about the best and worst spots on earth he replied that he 
did not know, and put the question to Gabriel on the latter’s next visit 
and Gabriel too declared that he did not know and had to wait until 
God made known to him that the best spots on earth were the mosques 
and the worst were the market-places . 6 

Ibn-‘Umar used to reply to one question out of every ten he 
was asked, while ibn-' Abbas used to answer nine and decline to reply 
to the tenth. There were also, among the jurists, men who said, ‘We 
do not know' more frequently than ‘We know’. Among these were 

1. Died in prison in A.H. 92/A.D. 710-11, when he was locked up by al- 
Hajjaj: see a/-Fi7>mr, p. 183;ibn-Sa‘d, Vol. VI, pp. 1 99-200; al-Sha‘rani, 
Vol. CpP 35-26. 

2. Rufay\ (A H 90 A.D. 709X see ibn-Sa'd , Vol. VI, Pt I, pp. 81-85; iibn- 
Qutaybah, p. 231; al-Sha‘rani Vol. I, p. 30. 

3. Usually identified with Ezra the scribes. See Surah , IX: 30 Jami'al - 
Bayan, Vol. ID, pp. 19-21, Vo. X, pp. 78-79; al-Tha‘alibi, pp. 329-333; 
Bernhard Heller art. “Uzair” in the Encyclopaedia of Islam. 

4. The royal title of the kings of the second Himyarite Kingdom (ca. A.D. 
300-525, interrupted only by the first Abyssinian period, A.D. 340-78) 
that has survived in Muslim literature. 

5. Alexander the Great. Mentioned in Surah XVII: 82, 85, 93, where he s 
invested with a divine commission for the extirpation of impiety and 
idolatry. Later legend makes him a prophet. See Jami * al -Bayan y Vol. 
XVI, PP. 7-12; al-Tha‘alibi, pp. 345-56; E. Mittwoch, art. “Dhu‘1- 
karnain” in the Encyclopaedia of Islam . 

6. Muslim , Masajid, 288. 


178 


The Book of Knowledge 

Sufyan al-Thawri, Malik ibn-Anas, Ahmad ibn-Hanbal, al-Fudayl 
ibn-‘Iyad, and Bishr ibn-al-Harith. 

‘ Abd-al -Rahman ibn-abi-Layla 1 once said that he had met in 
the Madinah Mosque one hundred and twenty of the Companions of 
the Apostle of God, not one of whom, on being asked a question or 
invited to express an opinion, would answer but would rather have 
one of his colleagues spare him the responsibility. And according to 
another report it was usual fpr each one of them, on being asked a 
question, to refer it to his colleague who in turn would do the same, 
and so on, until it had gone all around the Companions and had finally 
come back to the first. 

It has been related that one of the refugees of fire mosque 
vestibule (Ashab al-Suffah ) 2 was given a roasted head of a calf, 
although he was in a dire need for food he would not touch it but 
passed it on to one of his colleagues who in turn passed it on to 
another, and so on, until it had finally come back to the first refugee. 
See, then, how things have become now very different among tire 
learned men. Thus the repulsive things have now become desirable 
and the desirable, no longer sought. 

Attesting to the value of caution in undertaking die responsibility 
of giving judgment and expressing legal opinions is the authentic 
tradition which says, “People will not be judged except by three: a 
governor, a deputy, and an intruder.” Someone has related that the 
Companions used to decline four things: the imamate, legacies 

1. A.H. 83/A.D. 702; ibn-Sa'd, Vol. VII, pp. 74-7; ibn-Khallikan, Vol. I, 
p. 492. 

2. Better known as Ahl al-Suffah. Among the believing Makkans who had 
accompanied the Prophet on his migration to al-Madinah and among 
those who came from other places, there were some who were destitute, 
without means or shelter. They, therefore, encamped under suffah (the 
northern part of the mosque which was covered with a roof but had open 
sides). Here they lived and were provided with food and clothing by the 
community and were called the guests of Islam {adyaf al-Islam). In later 
times they became highly venerated See Hikyat al-Awliya \ Vol. I, p. 337, 
Vol. 0, p. 39; Reckendorf, art. “Ahl al-SufTa” in the Encyclopaedia of 
Islam. 


179 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


(wasiyah), deposits ( wadi ‘yah), and the handing down of legal 
(minions (fatwa or futya). Another said, that among jurists, the 
quickest to hand down a legal opinion is the least learned among 
them, and the most reluctant is the most religious. 

The activities of the Companions and their followers (al- 
tabi ‘ un ) were confined to five things: reading the Qur’an, building 
mosques, glorifying (dhikr) God, enjoining good, and forbidding evil 
because of what they heard the Prophet say concerning the son of 
Adam, namely that, with the exception of three things, all that he says 
will be held against him. These three are: to enjoin good, to forbid 
evil and to glorifv God. Said God, “In most of their secret talk is 
nothing good; but only in his who enjoineth almsgiving, or that which 
is right, or concord among men.” 1 

A certain learned man saw, in his sleep, one of the speculative 
jurists (ashab al-ra ’y) of al-Kufah and asked him, “What do you 
now think of your opinions and theories?” Thereupon the speculative 
jurist turned his face in agony and said, ‘We have neither found it 
worthwhile nor have we liked its outcome.” Describing such men 
abu-Hasan 2 said, “Any (me of them would readily express his 
opinion on problems which would have induced Umar ibn-al- 
Khattab to summon all the men who took part in the battle of Ba r 
for consultation.” Except under compelling circumstance silence 
c on t i nu ed to be the practice of the learned. We are told in our 
tradition, “If ye see a man given to silence and asceticism seek him 
because he teacheth wisdom.” 

It has also been said that the learned men are either ordinary 
men who hand down legal opinions and are the close friends of rulers 
or distinguished learned men who are well versed in theology and the 
works of the heart and spend their lives in the solitude of oratories 
(zawayaY throughout the world. 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 


inB and C, but more correctly abu-H^in'Uthman ibn-‘ Asim 
ibn-Hasin. (A.H. 128/ A.D. 745-46); see ibn-Sa d, Vol. VI, p. 224. 


Sing, zawiyah. 


It was customary to liken Ahmad ibn-Hanbal to the Tigris 
from the water of which everyone drew, and Bishr ibn-al-Hanth to 
a covered well of fresh water visited by a single person at a time. It 
was also the custom to describe a certain individual as a learned man, 
another as one who disputes (i mutakallim ), a third as given to more 
disputation (i kalam ), and a fourth as given more to work ( amal ). 
Abu-Sulavman (al-Darani) once said, “Knowledge is closer to 
silence than to loquacity.” It was also said, “When knowledge 
increases loquacity decreases, but when the latter increases the 
former decreases. 5 ' 

Salman (al-Farisi) 1 once wrote to abu-al-Darda\ to whom he 
Had been united by the Prophet in the ties of brotherhood, 2 saying, 
~0 my brother! I have been told that you have been practising 
medicine and treating patients. Now if thou be really a physician, 
speak, for in that would be assurance and healing. But if thou be only 
a practitioner, for God’s sake, do not kill any Muslim. Henceforth 
abu-al-Darda gave no more medical advice. Whenever Anas was 
asked anything he used to say, “Ask our master, al-Hasan ” 3 And 
whenever men would inquire of ibn- 4 Abbas it was his custom to sa\ , 
“Ask Jabir ibn-Zayd”; 4 while ibn- 4 Umar would say, “Ask Sa‘id ibn- 
al-Musayyab.” 

It has been related that a certain Companion recited twenty 
traditions in the presence of al-Hasan al-Basri. He was then asked to 
explain them but he demurred and said that he had nothing to add. 
Thereupon al-Hasan proceeded to explain them one by one and all 
were amazed at his excellent commentary and erudition. Equally 
amazed, the Companion reached down and picked up a handful of 
pebbles and throwing them at the company exclaimed, “How dare 
you ask me about learning when you have this great authority in your 
midst?” 

1 . A close Companion of the Prophet. The date of his death uncertain but is 
generally placed toward the end of A.H. 35/A.D. 556. See ibn-Sa d, 
Vol. IV* Pt. I, pp. 53-67. 

2. See al-Tirmidhi y Zuhd, 64. 3. Al-Basn. 

4. Al-Azdi, (A.H. 103/A.D. 721-22); see ibn-Sa'd , Vol. VII, Pt. I., pp. 
130-33. 


181 


180 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Another characteristic expected of the learned man is that he 
devotes the greatest part of his attention to esoteric knowledge, the 
observation (i muraqabah ) of the heart, the path of the hereafter and 
how to journey thereon, as well as to an abiding faith in finding that 
path through self-mortification (mujahadah) and observation. For 
self-mortification leads to contemplation ( mushahadah ), and through 
the intric ate details of the sciences of the heart fountains of wisdom 
will gush forth. Books and formal education are of little help in this 
field because the wisdom which passes all understanding is only 
achieved through self-mortification, observation and watching, the 
active fulfilment of outward and inward duties, coming before God 
(julus) in solitude (khalwah) and bringing the heart before His 
presence (hudur) through pure reflection (filer) and sole devotion to 
Him. This is the key of illumination (ilham) and the fountainhead of 
revelation (kashj) For while many a student has persisted in his 

but was unable to go beyond the words he had heard, many 
have confined their attention in their studies to what was important 
and were active in works, and bent on the observation of their hearts; 
consequently God has blessed them with wisdom which passes all 
Hn ^r ctamling For this reason the Prophet said, “He who would act 
acco r ding to his knowledge would be rewarded by God with further 
knowledge.” It was also said in one of the books of the ancients, O 
children of Israel! Say not that knowledge is in the heavens; who then 
will bring it down to earth? Nor say that it is in the mighty deeps of 
the earth; who then will bring up to heaven? Nor say that it is beyond 
the seas: who then will bring it across the waves? Verily knowledge 
is in your hearts. Follow, therefore, before me in the manner of the 
angpk (ruhaniyuri) and adopt the ways of the saints ( siddiqun ). Then 
will I pour of My knowledge into your hearts until they overflow with 
wisdom.” 

Sahl ibn-‘ Abdullah al-Tustari once said, “The learned men, 
the worshippers, and the ascetics departed from this life with their 
hearts closed; only the hearts of the saints and the martyrs were 
opened.” He quoted the words of God when He said, “And with Him 


are the keys of the secret things; none knoweth them but He .” 1 And 
had it not been for the fact that the enlightenment of the heart of him 
who has a heart with the inner light determines the esoteric knowledge 
( ‘ilm al-zahir) the Prophet would not have said, “Consult thy heart 
whenever they should recommend something to thee and give thee a 
dispensation to do it.” Then he said on the authority ofhis God, The 
servant will continue to draw near unto Me with supererogatory 
works and meritorious deeds (nawafiT) until he wins My favour, at 
which time I shall be his ears and his eyes .” 2 Many are the subtle 
meanings of the mysteries of the Qur’an which dawn upon the hearts 
of those who have devoted themselves to invocation ( dhikr ) and 
reflection (filer), but are not found in the books of commentary and 
remain unknown to the best commentators. Yet when such meanings 
are revealed to the watchful devotee (murid) and are then brought to 
the attention of commentators they would deem them good and would 
realize that they are the outcome of the workings of a pure heart and 
the gracious blessings of God on the high mind which aspires to Him. 
Similarly the science of revelation (mukashafah) and the secrets of 
the science of practical religion (mu ' amalah ) as well as the subtleties 
of the passing thoughts (khonvatir) of the heart are, each and every 
one of them, seas the depths of which are too great to be sounded and 
can be traversed by seekers only to the extent to which each of them 
has been given the power and the ability to do good. Describing such 
men, ‘ Ali, in the course of a long conversation, said, “The hearts are 
like vessels; the best among them is that which can hold the most of 
good. Men are of three kinds: divine (rabbani) learned men, seekers 
of knowledge for the hope of salvation, and rude ruffians who follow 
every cry and are swayed by every passing wind. They follow not the 
light of knowledge and stand not on its firm foundation. Verily 
knowledge is better than wealth; for while you guard wealth, it is 
knowledge which guards over you . Knowledge increases by spending 
while wealth diminishes therewith. Knowledge is a religion worthy 
of acceptance. Through it man is assured of the ability to live in 
accordance with the will of God in this life and of kindly words from 
his fellowmen after his death. Knowledge governs while wealth is 

1 Surah VI: 59. 2. Al-Bukhan, Riqaq, 38. 

183 


182 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


governed. With the loss of wealth its value vanishes and its hoarders 
are dead even while they live. On the other hand the learned men will 
live as long as time shall last.” Taking a deep breath and pointing to 
his breast, ‘Ali said, “Herein is abundant knowledge, but I can find 
no one to carry it on. Instead 1 find seekers who I cannot trust; they 
exploit religion for worldly gain, employ the gifts of God for 
fastening their yoke on His saints ( awliya *), and exalt themselves 
therewith over His people. I find men who follow the righteous but, 
for the least matter, become the victims of doubt and scepticism. 
They have neither understanding nor insight. I find gluttons guilty of 
indulgence, easily led in the ways of lust. I find men lured by the desire 
to amass wealth and hoard it, who follow their appetite and have 
closer resemblance to grazing cattle than to human beings. On my 
God! Thus will knowledge perish when its people die. But the world 
will not be destitute of men who will champion the cause of God, 
some openly in public while others secretly for fear of persecution, 
lest the proofs and evidence of existence be nullified. How many are 
they and where are they to be found? Such men boast of the smallest 
number but in worth they are the greatest. They have no equals 
among men; their strength lies in their heart. Through them God will 
preserve the proofs of His existence until they entrust His testament 
to their successors or plant its seeds in the hearts of their fellow- 
saints. With their knowledge they attacked the basic problem and 
arrived at the core of the truth, penetrating what the pampered have 
d remed inaccessible and delighting in what the foolish have feared. 
They go through this life with bodies, the spirits of which look for 
heaven. They are the saints of God among His people, His trustees 
and deputies on earth, and the missionaries (du ‘ah) who summon 
men to His religion.” He then wept and said, “Oh how much 1 long 
- to see them!” What he mentioned at the end is the description of the 
learned men of the hereafter, the greater part of whose knowledge is 
obtained through works and continued self-mortification. 

Another characteristic of the learned man is that he should be 
greatly concerned with the strengthening of his faith (yaqin) which 
is the mainspring of religion. Said the Apostle of God, “Faith is belief 


in its entirety.” Acquiring the science of faith is, therefore, 
indispensable. By this I mean its rudiments which, when acquired, 
yvill open its path for the heart. For this reason the Prophet said, 
“Acquire faith.” This means that you should associate with those 
who have faith, receiving from them the science of faith, and 
persisting in following their example so that your faith may wex 
strong as has theirs. Furthermore a little faith is better than much 
work. Thus when the Prophet was consulted concerning a man of 
much faith and many sins and another who was steadfast in worship 
but had little faith, he said, “There is none without sin. But anyone 
who is intelligent by nature and also has faith will not suffer from sin, 
because whenever he sins he will repent and ask forgiveness. He will 
then be forgiven and left enough virtue wherewith he will entei 
Paradise.” For this reason the Prophet said, “Verily among the 
things of which you have been given the least, are faith and patience. 
Whoever has been given his share of these two would not care what 
he had missed of night prayer and day fasting ” In the testament of 
Luqman to his son we read, “O my son! Work is not possible except 
through faith. Man does not accomplish except in proportion to his 
faith, and does not fail except when it wanes.” Yahya ibn-Mu‘adh 
said, “Monotheism ( tawhid) brings forth light and polytheism 
(shirk), fire. The light of monotheism will wipe out the offences of the 
monotheism more completely than the fire of polytheism will wipe 
out the good deeds of the polytheists.” By the light of monotheism, 
Yahya meant faith. God also referred to those who have faith in 
several places in the Qur’an and pointed out that through faith they 
receive His blessings and the happiness of the hereafter . 

You may say, “What, then, is the meaning of faith (yaqin), its 
strength, and its weakness, since it should first be understood before 
it can be sought and studied?” Then you should know that the word 
(yaqin) is a homonymous term which two different groups of people 
apply to two distinct meanings. 

To the philosophers (huzzar) and scholastic theologians 
(mutiakallimun) the terms signifies lackofdoubt(i.e. certainty). 

The readiness of the person to believe a thing falls into four states: 


184 


185 



The Book of Knowledge 


The first is where the evidence for believing and disbelieving 
is even; it is described by doubt. Thus when you are asked whether 
or not God is going to punish a certain person whose manner of life 
is not known to you, are not prepared to affirm or deny either for both 
are equally possible. Such a state is called doubt ( shak ). 

The second state is where you are more inclined to accept one 
position while realizing that the contrary is possible. But this 
possibility does not prevent you from giving preference to the former 
For example you may be asked whether a certain person whom you 
know for righteousness and piety will be punished or not if when he 
dies he is still the same? Because of his evident righteousness you are 
more inclined to believe that he will not be punished. Nevertheless 
you admit the possibility that something which requires punishment 
may have been concealed in his secret life. This admission equals the 
inclination but does not rule out the possibility that it is the more 
likely. Such a state is described by the term conjecture ( zann ). 

The third state obtains when one is inclined to believe a thing 
so earnestly that he is taken up by it to such an extent that nothing else 
seems possible to him and if such a thing ever comes to his mind, he 
will refuse to believe it. He does not do this because of any definite 
knowledge; for if he would only examine more carefully the first two 
states, namely that of doubt and conjecture, he would more readily 
admit other possibilities. Such a state is described as a belief 
approaching certainty (i ‘tiqad muqarib li-l-yaqin), which is similar 
to the belief of the common folk in all legal matters ( shar 7 at), i.e. 
they accept as fact that which is simply hearsay. Thus every group 
is certain of the authenticity of its own system ( madhhab ) and the 
infalli bility of its own imam or leader. Should any one member of 
these groups be reminded of the possibility that his imam might be 
mistaken he would resent it very much and refuse to admitt. 

The fourth state is that of definite knowledge ( m 'arifah 
haqiqiyah) resulting from evidence which leaves no place for doubt 
or any possibility of doubt. When doubt or any possibility of doubt 
are ruled out of the state of certainty (yaqiri) obtains. As an example 


186 


The Book of Knowledge 


of this state we may cite the following: When a wise man is asked, “Is 
there anything eternal ( qadim ) in existence ( wujud)T ’ he will not be 
able to affirm or deny the question instantly because the eternal is not 
perceived by the senses ( ghayer mahsus ) unlike, for example, the sun 
and moon which are so perceived . Furthermore the fact that something 
eternal exists is not axiomatic in the same way as the feet that two is 
greater than one is axiomatic; rather it is like the feet that the 
origination ( huduth ) of anything originated (hadith) is impossible 
without a cause ( sabab ), which is also axiomatic but in a different 
way. It is therefore the duty of the mind to hesitate to accept 
spontaneously surd intuitively the existence of the eternal. But there 
are some who may hear these things and on such authority accept 
them without question, and continueto believe them. This is the belief 
(/ ‘tiqad) which coincides with the state of all the common folk. 

There are others who believe only through evidence. These are 
told that if nothing eternal exists then all existingthings are originated; 
and if all existing things are originated then they are originated 
without a cause, or some of them are so originated, all of which is 
impossible and what leads to the impossible is itself impossible. 
Therefore, out of sheer necessity, the mind is compelled to believe in 
the existence of something eternal . For there are only three positions, 
that all existing things are eternal; that all are originated; that some 
are eternal and some are originated. If all are eternal the question will 
have been answered since all are held to the eternal. But if all are 
originated we shall have to accept the impossible, namely origination 
without a cause. Consequently the third and first positions are 
established. Every kind of knowledge thus obtained is called 
certainty {yaqiri), whether it has been obtained through reasoning 
(nazir) such as that above; or through the mind instinctively, as the 
impossibility of any originated existence without a cause; or through 
tradition, as the knowledge that Makkah exists, or through 
experimentation, such as our knowledge that cooked scammonv is a 
laxative; or through some evidence, as we have already stated. Both 
the philosophers and the scholastic theologians require the lack of 
doubtbeforetheyusethisterm. Every part ofknowledge which is free 
from doubt is called certainty iyaqin) Consequently certainty is 


187 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


never described with weakness because there are no degrees in the 
negation of doubt. 

The second application of the term ( yaqin ) is that of the jurists 
and the Sufis as well as most of the learned men. In it, no attention 
is paid to either conjecture or doubt but rather to the fact that it takes 
hold of and prevails over the mind so that it is something said that so 
and so does not believe in death, although there is no doubt about it; 
and another has a strong faith that his livelihood is incoming, 
although it is quite possible that it will never accrue. Thus whenever 
uie soul inclines to the acceptance of anything which prevails over the 
heart and takes hold of it, and as a result becomes the ruler and 
dispenser of the soul either by urging it to action or by forbidding 
therefrom, such a thing is called faith {yaqin). 

Undoubtedly all men agree concerning the certainty of death 
and entertain not the slightest doubt regarding its imminence. Yet 
there are some among them who heed not its approach nor prepare 
for its advent as though they were not sure of it. Some, on the other 
hand, are so obsessed by the fear of death that they have directed all 
their attention towards preparation for it, leaving thereby no room for 
anything else. Such a state is described as strength of faith. For this 
reason someone has said, “I have seen nothing so certain and at the 
same time so completely unheeded as death.” In accordance with this 
terminology faith (yaqin) may be described with either strength or 
weakness. 

When we said that it was for the learned men of the hereafter 
to expend their efforts in the strengthening of the yaqin we had in 
mind both meanings, namely the negation of doubt (i.e. certainty and 
the giving of full power and control to the yaqin over the soul until 
is becomes the dominant ruler over it and sole dispenser of affairs (i.e. 
faith). 

When you understand this, you will perceive what we mean 
when we shall say that yaqin may be described in three different 
fashions, as to strength and weakness, greatness and littleness, and 
finally clearness and vagueness. 

188 


As to strength and weakness they are applied to the second 
technical meaning of yaqin, (namely faith), in so far as faith prevails 
over and takes hold of the heart. The degrees of faith in respect to 
strength and weakness are unlimited, and the extent to which people 
will prepare for death varies in accordance with the extent to which 
their faith may differ in regard to these same terms (namely, strength 
and weakness). 

The existence of varying degrees of clearness and vagueness 
within the first technical use of the term yaqin, (namely certainty), 
cannot be denied. They exist in the first state, i.e. doubt, as well as 
in the second, i.e. conjecture. In neither of these could their existence 
be denied. Nor could the existence of these varying degrees of 
clearness and vagueness be denied even where doubt has been 
dispelled. For example you can readily understand that there is a 
difference between your belief in the existence of Makkah and that 
of Fadak, 1 or between your acceptance of the historicity of Moses and 
that of Joshua (Yus ha"), 2 although you do not really doubt either 
because the authority for both is tradition. Yet the one is clearer and 
more vivid in vour mind than the other, because its evidence is greater 
since more historians have mentioned it. 

The same thing is true of the philosopher (nazir) in connexion 
with any theory arrived at through deduction; because what he 
surmises through the evidence of one proof is not as clear in his mind 
as that which he establishes through the evidence of several proofs, 
although both are equal in the negation of doubt. This, however, is 
sometimes denied by the scholastic theologian who draws his 
knowledge from books and hearsay sources and does not take into 
consideration what he already knows regarding the variations in 
those states. 

As to littleness and greatness they relate to the appurtenances 
(mata ‘alliqat) of the yaqin. For example a person’s knowledge may 

1 . A small village about six miles north of Madinah. It figured in early 
Muslim history. See Yaqut, Buldan, Vol. ID, pp. 85 j-58. 

2. Not mentioned by name in the Qur’an but it is held that Sumh, XVIII: 59 
refers to him. 

189 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


be described as greater than that of another which meas that his 
learning is greater. For this reason the learned man may be very well 
versed in all the contents of the laW or in only a part of it. 

If you then say that you have understood yaqin, its strength 
and weakness, greatness and littleness, and clearness and vagueness 
in both its meanings as the negation of doubt and as the taking hold 
of the heart, and ask what its appurtenance comprise, what the means 
whereby it is secured are, and how it can be sought (because unless 
you know how and where to seek it you cannot secure it), then you 
should know that what the prophets handed down belongs in its 
entirety to the means whereby the yaqin is secured. For yaqin 
represents a specific knowledge while its appurtenances are the bits 
of information which are contained in the law, and there is no hope 
of ever counting them. Nevertheless I shall point out some which 
constitute the major appurtenance. 

One of these is th e belief in the unity of God ( al-tawhid ). It is 
acknowledged that all things have come from God, the Cause of all 
causes ( musabbib al-asbab), paying no attention to the secondary 
causes (yvasai 7) and acknowledging that they are all subject to the 
will of God and have no will of their own. He who believes this has 
yaqin. If, over and above his belief, all possibilities of doubt are 
removed from his heart, then he possess yaqin of the first meaning 
(i.e. certainty). But if, over and above his belief, a power will prevail 
over his heart which will remove from it all anger provoked by the 
secondary causes when they foil him, or gratitude to them when they 
serve him, and will make him regard these secondary causes merely 
as instruments in the hand of God in the same way as the pen in the 
hand of the benefactor when he signs his name, as well as the hand 
itself, is an instrument for no one will be grateful to either the pen of 
the hand, or be angry at them, rather he will acknowledge them as two 
instruments subject to the will of their master, two mediums through 
which the will was enforced, then he will possess yaqin of the second 
meaning, i.e faith. 

The secondyaqin is the nobler of the two and is the fruit of the 


first as well as its life and value. Thus whenever man will examine 
the sun, moon, and stars as well as the inanimate plants, animals, and 
all things created, and realize that they are subject to the will of God 
in the same way as the pen is in the hand of the scribe, and that the 
eternal power is the source of all, the power of dependence, 
contentment, and resignation will prevail over his heart and he will 
possess yaqin, becoming free of anger, rancour, envy, and ill-temper. 
This is one of the doors which leads to the yaqin. 

Another is confidence that God will guarantee to all their 
livelihood according to His word when He said, “There is no moving 
thing that moveth upon the face of the earth but its provision is from 
Me,” 1 and faith that each individual will receive his portion. It also 
involves a belief that whatever has been preordained will befell the 
individual. Whenever this belief prevails over his heart, he will 
maintain his integrity while seeking a living, and neither his stint nor 
his greed will increase. Above all he will not regret anything which 
he missed. Furthermore this kind of faith (yaqin) has fostered several 
good works (ta 'at) and praiseworthy habits. 

Another is to have one’s heart possessed by the idea that 
“whosoever shall wrought an atom’s weight of good shall behold it, 
and whosoever shall have wrought an atom’s weight of evil shall 
behold it.” 2 In other words it is to believe in reward ( thawab ) and 
punishment ( ‘iqab) so that one might realize that the relation of the 
acts of worship to reward is like that ofbread to satiety, and sin stands 
in relation to punishment as poison and venomous vipers stand in 
relation to death. So just as men, in order to satisfy their hunger, 
strive to obtain bread and store it, whether its quantity is small or 
large, so must they strive to fulfil all acts of worship, whether they' 
be few or many. Similarly just as men avoid poisons regardless of the 
quantity, so must they avoid all sins, the few and the many as well as 
the minor and the major. 

The yaqin of the first meaning, (i.e. certainty) is found among 
all believers while that of the second meaning, (i.e. faith), is 

7 . Surah, XI: 8. 2. Surah, XCIX: 7-8. 


190 


191 





The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


characteristic of the favourites of God ( al-muqarrabun ). The fruits 
of this faith (yaqin) are genuine observation ( muraqabah ) of the 
heart in its moments of groping (harakat), tranquillity ( saknat ), and 
passing thoughts ( khatarat ), as well as extreme emphasis on piety 
and determined resolve to avoid all evils. The stronger the faith the 
stronger the resolution and the stronger the effort. 

Another is the belief that God is constantly watching you, 
knowing all the cogitations of your conscience and the hidden 
meditation of your inward thoughts and reflections. This is accepted 
by every believer who possesses a yaqin according to the first 
meaning, namely certainty, or the negation of doubt; but its second 
meaning which is the one we have in mind, namely faith, is very' 
scarce and is characteristic of the saints. Its firuit is to make man in 
his solitude as cultured and refined under all conditions as a man in 
audience with an exalted king. He fixes his eyes on the king and sits 
before him in silence, maintaining a polite appearance in all his 
doings and carefully restraining himself from the slightest thing 
which may violate etiquette. There will be no disparity between his 
inward thoughts and his outward deeds because he will realize that 
God watches his inner life just as men watch his outward behaviour. 
Consequently his effort to develop and purify his inner life in order 
to make it acceptable before the encompassing eyes of God should be 
greater than his effort to make his outward behaviour agreeable to 
men. This state of faith (yaqin) breeds modesty, fear, meekness, 
lowliness, submission, and obedience as well as other praiseworthy 
qualities; while these qualities are conducive to many superior good 
works ( la ‘at). 

In every one of these examples the yaqin is like the tree; these 
qualities of the heart are like the branches which shoot out from it; 
and the good works and acts which result from these qualities are like 
the fruits and blossoms which sprout out from the branches. The 
yaqin, then, is the origin and the foundation, and has more kinds arid 
variations than we have already mentioned. These we shall discuss 
in the Quarter on the Saving Matters of Life. For the present what we 
have already mentioned is enough. 


Another characteristic expected of the learned man is that he 
be sorrowful, meek, pensive, and silent. The signs of the fear of God 
should be evident in his appearance, clothes, life, movements, and 
poise as well as in his speech and silence. No one will ever view him 
without being reminded of God. His free will reveal his works forthe 
eyes of the righteous one reflect his soul. The marks of the learned 
men of the hereafter, too, are recognized in their faces' which reflect 
traquillity (sakinah), lowliness, and modesty. Thus it has been said, 
“God has not fitted a man with a garment better than submission with 
tranquility. It is the garment of the Prophets and the mark of the 
virtuous and the saints and the learned.” On the other hand to chatter 
and prate and to indulge in excessive laughter as well as temper and 
flippancy are all the outcome of a life of smugness and ease in which 
man becomes unmindful of God’s terrible punishment and great 
wrath. It is the practice of the children of this world who have 
forgotten God rather than that of the learned men, because, as al- 
Tustari said, “The learned men are of three kinds. The first kind are 
those who know the commandments ofGod but not the Days of God 
(ayyam Allah ), 2 they are the judges who rule what is lawful and what 
is unlawful. This knowledge does not develop fear. The second kind 
are those who know God but not His Days; they are the ordinary 
believers. The third kind of learned men are those who know God as 
well as His commandments and Days; they are the saints in whose 
hearts fear and humility prevail.” By the Days of God al-Tustari 
meant the unknown punishments which God inflicted and His 
hidden blessings which He bestowed upon the preceding ages, and 
which He will also visit upon the succeeding generations. Hence 
anyone whose knowledge encompasses this, his fear of God would 
increase and his humility would grow. 

Hadrat ‘Umar once said, “Acquire knowledge and develop 
thereby poise, dignity, and tolerance. Humble yourselves before your 
teachers and let your students do the same before you. And be not 

7 Cf. Surah, XL VII: 29. 

2. The Days of God (ayyam Allah) are the epiphanies by which He reveals 

His perfection. See Did. of Tech. Terms, p. 1545. 


192 


14 


193 



The Book of Knowledge 

arrogant in your learning lest your knowledge encourage ignorance ’ ’ 
It is also said, “God has nbt given any of His servants knowledge 
without giving him tolerance, humility, good nature, and kindliness 
as well.” Of such is the useful knowledge. 

We also read in history' that, “He to whom God gives 
knowledge, asceticism, humility, and good-nature is foremost among 
the pious.” And in tradition we read, “Verily there are among my 
people men who rejoice openly at the extent of the mercy of God and 
weep in secret for fear of His punishment. They live on the earth but 
their hearts are in heaven; they themselves are in this world but their 
minds are focussed on the hereafter. They live in tranquillity and 
draw near unto God through the means (wasa 7/) 1 of His grace.” Al- 
Hasan al Basri said, ‘Tolerance is the vizier of knowledge, 
kindliness its father, and humility its garment.” 

Bisbr ibn-al-Harith said, “He who seeks position through 
knowledge and approaches God while his heart is fall of hatred, will 
be detested in heaven and in earth.” It is mentioned in the Books of 
Israel (al-Isra 7 liyat) that a certain wise man had composed three 
hundred and sixty works on wisdom and thus earned the sobriquet al 
hakim (the wise). Thereupon God revealed to the Prophet of Israel at 
that time saying, “Speak unto such and such a person and tell him, 
‘Thus said the Lord: You have filled the earth with twaddle but you 
have not mentioned me in a single word: therefore I accept nothing 
of it.” On being so informed, the wise man repented and, abjuring his 
twaddle, mixed with the common folk and roamed the streets 
befriending all the children oflsrael, and humbled himself. Then God 
revealed to the Prophet saying, ‘Tell him, now you have gained my 
favour.” 

Al-Awza‘i related that Bilal ihn-S‘ad 2 used to say, 
“Whenever you see a policeman you invoke the protection of God 

1. Sing, wasilah, mentioned in Surahs V: 39 and XVII: 59. Cf. Jami'al- 
Bayan, Vol. VI, pp. 146-47. 

2. Died during the reign of Hisham I, (A.H. 105-125/A.D. 724-43). See ibn- 
Sa ‘ d , Vol. VO, Pt. 2, p. 1 66; also ibn-Asakir, Vol. ID, pp. 3 1 5-8, where his 
name appears as Bilal ibn-Sa‘id. 


194 


The Book of Knowledge 


against him, but when you see the learned man of this world who 
curry favour with all people and hanker after position, vou do not 
detest them although of the two the latter are the more detestable ” 
It has also been related that the Apostle of God was once a sM, 
“Which works are the best?” He replied, “To avoid evil and persist 
in the praise of God ” He was then asked, “Who are the best 
companions?” To which he replied, “A companion who will help 
when you ask for aid, and will remember vou when vou forget to 
ask.” “Who, then, is the worst companion?” was the next question. 
To which he replied, “A companion who will not remember you if 
you do not remind him and will not help you when you ask for help.” 
He was then asked, “And who is the most learned man?” The 
Prophet replied, “He who fears God the most.” “Tell us, then,” they 
said, “who are the best among us in order that we might sit at their 
feet?” The Prophet replied, “Those who would remind you of God 
whenever they are seen.” They then asked, “And who are the 
worst?” To which Muhammad (S A W.) said, “Thy forgiveness, O 
God my Lord!” But they said, “Tell us, O Apostle ofGod.”Hethen 
said, “The learned men when they become corrupt.” 1 The Apostle 
also said, “Those who have been most apprehensive in this world 
will, on the day of resurrection, be the most secure, while those who 
have wept most will laugh most, and those who have been saddest will 
be the happiest.” 

In one of his sermons Hadrat 4 Ali said, “My conscience is 
pledged to God although I am a leader. Verily the crops of no one will 
wither if they were planted with piety, and the roots of no tree will 
thirst if it were raised with righteousness. The most ignorant man is 
he who has picked up haphazardly tidbits ofknowledge which carried 
him into the darkness of sin, yet despite this and despite the fact that 
he has not spent a single day in study, he has been called learned by 
disreputable and evil men. He would go after quantity not knowing 
that little knowledge of the right kind is better than a great deal of it 
which diverts man from God. He would drink, as it were, from 
stagnant and stale waters and engage in diverse activities but to no 

1 Unidentified. 


195 





The Book of Knowledge 


avail. Then he would sit down to teach men and to explain to them 
what is obscure. If, however, he would be confronted with a weighty 
problem he would hand down a wordy and redundant opinion which, 
rather than remove all ambiguity, would entangle the inquirer in a 
mess of confusion similar to a cobweb, and would so baffle him as 
to make it impossible for him to determine whether the man is right 
or wrong. He is rooted in ignorance and is the victim of diabolical 
He will not decline to answer that which he does not know 
and thus avoid error, nor will he strive to gain a strong hold on 
knowledge that through its mastery he may prosper. Through his 
ignorance blood is shed, and through his juridical opinions unlawful 
adultery is rendered lawful. He is not capable of dispensing with the 
problems which have been submitted to him and is not equal to the 
task which has been delegated to his care. On such men should fall 
the worst punishment; they should bewail and lament their fate while 

they yet live.” 


Hadrat ‘Ali also said, “Hold fast to knowledge when you hear 
it and mix it not with jesting lest it be rejected.” One of the Fathers 
said, ‘Whenever man jests, his knowledge is impaired. It was also 
said, “When the teacher is so fortunate as to possess patience, 
humility, and good nature, the student’s lot will be perfect; similarly 
whenever the student possesses intelligence, good manners, and keen 
understanding/the teacher will have nothing more to desire . ” In short 
the qualities Which the Qur’an mentions are indispensable to the 
learned men of the hereafter because they- should study the Qur an m 
order to go about doing good and not to occupy positions of power 
and prestige. Ibn ‘Umar said, “For a short period of tune it was 
customary for us to be instructed in die elements of faith before the 
Qur’an Whenever a Surah was revealed we would leam the lawful 
thiiKS it enjoined and the unlawful things it foibade, its commandments 
and its prohibitions, as well as those things at which we had to stop. 
But I have also seen men who master the text of the Qur’an before 
learning the elements of faith They' would read the Qur’an from 
to end: vet thev would not know what it commands and 
what it prohibits, nor those things at which one should stop. They 


1% 


The Book of Knowledge 


would handle these things and toss them about as though they were 
the most inferior dates in quality.” A similar meaning is expressed 
in another tradition which reads, “As Companions of the AposUe of 
Allah we were instructed in the elements of faith before the Qur’an; 
but there shall come after you people who will master the text of the 
Qur’an before the elements of faith; they will observe the rules of its 
reading according to the different dialects (hum/), but will ignore its 
precepts and commandments. They will say'. We read the Qur an, 
who could read it better than we? We have knowledge of it; who has 
better knowledge of it than we? This shall be their share ” According 
to another version, “Those men are the most wicked among this 
people.” 

It has been said that five qualities inferred from five verses in 
the Book of Allah are characteristic of the learned men of the 
hereafter. These qualities are fear of Allah, humility, modesty, good 
nature, and preference of the hereafter over this world, which is 
asceticism. 

Fear is based on the words of God when He said, “Such only 
of His servants as are possessed of knowledge fear God.” 1 Humility 
finds its authority in the words of God when He said, “Humbling 
themselves before God, they barter not His signs for a mean price.” 2 
Modesty finds its support in the following words of God, “And lower 
thy wing to the believers.” 3 Good nature is inferred from the words 
of God when He said, “Of the mercy of God thou hast spoken to them 
in gentle terms.” 4 Asceticism has its foundation in the words of God 
when He said, “But they to whom knowledge had been given said, 
‘Woe to you! The reward of God is better for him who believeth and 
worketh righteousness!” 5 

When the Apostle of Allah recited the verse, “And whom 
Allah shall please to guide, that man’s breast shall be open to 
Islam,” 6 he was asked what it meant and he replied, “When the light 
is cast into the heart the latter receives it gladly.” He was then asked, 

T. Surah, XXXV: 25. 2. Surah, ffl: 198. 

3. Surah, XV: 88. 4. Surah, HI: 153. 

6. Surah, XXVIII: 80. 6. Surah, VI: 125. 


197 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


“Has that any signs?” To which he replied, “Yes. The renunciation 
of this world of vanity and delusion, the repair to the hereafter, and 
the preparation for death before it arrives.” 

Another characteristic ofthe learned man is to have most ofhis 
study and research directed towards the science of practical religion 
(‘/7m al a'mal ), especially such influences as would lead to its 
corruption, perplex the hearts, stir up doubts and provoke evil, for the 
basic idea of religion is to eschew evil. For this reason it was said: 

Evil have I known though not 
For evil’s sake but to avoid 
Its toils; and he who knows it not 
Will surely be ensnared thereby. 

The practical works are within reach of all, and the best of 
these works is to persist in the praise of God in thought and word . The 
difficult part, however, is to determine what things will corrupt 
practical religion and what things will confuse it. These things are 
many and its parts are numerous, while a detailed discussion of it is 
inevitably long. But the need for it is very great, because through 
these corrupting and confusing influences disaster overtakes the 
travellers along the path of the hereafter. 

The learned men of this world, rather than attending to the 
problems of their day, pursue the strangest hair-splitting injudicial 
decisions and cases. They take special pains in formulating 
hypothetical cases which will probably never take place. But if some 
of these cases should ever take place, they will not occur in their own 
experiences but in those of others, in which event there will be many 
capable of handling them. These pressing problems which they have 
neglected continue to haunt them night and day, troubling their 
thoughts and minds, and perturb them in their actions. Thus how far 
removed from happiness is he who neglects pressing and intimate 
concerns in favour of the unnecessary concerns, of others, preferring 
to gain thereby the approval and the plaudits of men rather than those 
of God. Still worse, the reprobates of this world call such a person 
a superior man, a thorough scholar, and a versatile learned man . But 


his reward from God is that, in this world, he will gain nothing from 
men’s approval of him. On the contrary, misfortunes will 
overshadow his happiness, and finally he will stand on the day of 
resurrection bankrupt, and will be filled with regret when he views 
the gains of the doers of good and the success of those who have won 
God’s favour. Truly this is “the complete ruin”, (which is spoken of 
in the Qur’an) 

Al-Hasan al-Basri said, “It is agreed that the man whose 
words bear the greatest resemblance to those of the Prophets and 
w'hose way of life is closest to that of the Companions is he whose 
words are for the greater part concerned with inward thoughts, the 
influences which corrupt works and perplex minds as well as with 
the hidden and unknown qualities which characterize the appetites of 
the soul.” 

Al-Hasan was also told, “O Abu-Sa‘id! You utter words 
which are never heard from others besides yourself. Whence did you 
get them?” He replied, “From Hudhayfah ibn-al-Yaman.” 
Hudhayfah was then asked, “We see that you utter words which are 
never heard from any of the Companions besides you. Whence did 
you get them?” Thereupon he replied, “From the Apostle of God 
who favoured me therewith. While others querried him about good, 
I querried him about evil for fear of falling therein. As to good, I 
realize that its knowledge will not escape me.” 2 At another time die 
Apostle said “I have come to realize that he who knows not evil 
knows not good.” And according to another version, “People were 
wont to ask the Apostle saying, ‘O Apostle of God! What is die 
reward of him who does such and such a thing?’ and would query him 
regarding meritorious deeds. But I used to ask him saying, ‘O Apostle 
of God! What would corrupt such and such a thing?” When the 
Apostle of God saw that I was continually asking him about the bane 
of good works, he favoured me with the special knowledge.” 

T. Cf. Surahs XXII: II, XXXIX: 17. 

2. Cf. Surah Q: 7, XXXIII; 47, LVD: 13. These referto the “hypocrities”of 

al-Madinah who professed to follow Muhammad (S A W.) but opposed 

him secretly. 


198 


199 




The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


Hudhayfah was also specially favoured with the knowledge of 
die hypocrites (al-munafiquri), and was unique in his acquaintance 
with the science and causes of hypocrisy and the subtleties of 
tfm pratinns For that reason Hadrat ‘Umar and ‘Usman as well as the 
elders of the Companions used to query him about the ordinary' and 
parti cu lar temptations. It was also customary for him to be asked 
about the hypocrites, and he would tell how many of them were still 
alive, but would not reveal their names. Hadrat ‘Umar used to ask his 
advice as to whether he could see in him any traces of hypocrisy , but 
Hudhayfah always declared him free of that affliction. Furthermore, 
whenever 'Umar was invited to officiate at a funeral he would first 
look around and see whether Hudhayfah was present among the 
mourners, and if he were he would proceed with the service; 
otherwise he would refrain. Hudhayfah was also called the man with 
the inw feeling (sahib al-sirr). Thus to take care of the stations and 
s t a tes of the heart has always been the concern of all the learned men 
of the hereafter, because it is the heart which endeavours to draw near 
to God. Yet this branch of knowledge has now become unknown and 
forgotten to the extent that whenever a learned man would address 
himself to any part of it, he would be considered odd and unusual, and 
his efforts would be branded as die. embellishments of preachers. 
How for and different from that are the researches which men now 
cany in the niceties of dialectics and argumentation! The poet was 
right when he said: 

Many are the roads, but truth is a single path. 

And those who tread this way are few; 

They pass unrecognized, their goal unknown. 

While slowly and steadily they press along. 

Men do not know for what they were created. 

And most of them fail to see the path of truth. 

In short, most men incline toward the line of least resistance 
and pursue what is most agreeable to their nature, because truth is 
better, its discovery difficult, its attainment hard, and its road rough, 
especially as it pertains to the knowledge of the qualities of the heart 
and to its purification from blameworthy traits. It is a continual 


source of torment to the spirit; he who pursues it is like the person 
who takes his medicine and bears its bitterness in the hope of being 
cured, or like the man who fasts throughout his life and suffers all the 
rigors involved in order to enjoy breaking his fast after death. Yet 
when was this path ever popular or attractive? For this reason there 
were in al-Basrah one hundred and twenty speakers engaged in 
preaching and warning, but of those engaged in the science of religion 
( 77m al yaqiri), the study of the states of the heart and the qualities 
of the inner self, there were only six, 1 among whom were al-Tustari, 
al-Subayhi, 2 and ‘Abd-al Rahim. 3 To the former there always 
flocked a great and numberless crowd, while to the latter only a small 
group which seldom exceeded ten usually came. Valuable and 
precious things are not fit except for the elite, and what is placed at 
the disposal of the mob is cheap. 

Another characteristic of the learned man is that he should rely 
in his studies on his insight and understanding which enlighten his 
heart, rather than on manuscripts and books, or the blind acceptance 
of what he hears from others. Only the lawgiver, in what he has 
ordered and said and the Companions, whose deeds testify that the\ 
received thei knowledge from the Prophet, should be emulated. Then 
when the lawgiver is emulated through the acceptance of his words 
and deeds, care should be taken to understand their significance 
(sirr) . The follower performs an act simply because the lawgiver did 
it. But the lawgiver did not perform the act except for some particular 
significance inherent in it. For this reason the follower should 
diligently endeavour to determine the significance of those deeds and 
words, because if he is satisfied with the mere retention of what he 
hears he is a vessel of information and not a learned man. For this 
reason it was customary to describe a person who was given to the 
mere retention of information in his memory, without ever trying to 

1. Six in B, three in other copies. 

2. Unidentified. 

3. ‘ Abd-al-Rahman according to B: unidentified. Al-Ghazzali took these 
names, just as he had taken a great deal of the contents of the Iliya' from 
the Qut-al-Qutub of Abu-Talib al-Makki. see Qut-al-Qutub (Cairo, 
1351), Vol. D, p. 32. 


200 


201 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


familiarize himself with its significance and wisdom, as one of the 
vessels of information. But he who would remove the veil from his 
heart and would allow it to be flooded with the light of guidance 
would himself become a leader to be emulated, and therefore should 
not blindly follow the example of others. With this in mind ibn- 
4 Abbas said, '"There is no one except the Prophet whose knowledge 
is not sometimes followed and sometimes rejected.” Thus although 
ibn- 4 Abbas had received his knowledge of jurisprudence from Zayd 
ibn-Thabit and had studied the Qur'an reading at the feet of Ubayv 
ibn-K'ab, 1 he later contradicted both in jurisprudence and Qur’an 
reading, respectively. 

One of the Fathers said. "Whatever is handed down to us on 
the authority of the Apostle of God we accept willingly, but what we 
receive on the authority of the Companions we may accept and we 
may reject. It is, however, a different story when we consider what 
we receive from the followers ( al-iabi ‘ un ), because they were men 
like ourselves. The superiority of the Companions lie in the fact that 
they witnessed the circumstances under which the Prophet had lived, 
and their hearts were endued with the means of perception. 
Consequently their first hand knowledge of these circumstances and 
their ability 7 to perceive and understand led them to that which is right 
in a manner beyond description. The light of prophecy shone upon 
them to a degree sufficient to guard them, for the most part, from 
error. 

Furthermore if dependence on heresav is unsatisfactory 
imitation, dependence on books and compositions are worse, because 
they are a recent novelty, none of which existed during the time of the 
Companions and the early days of the followers (al-tabi un). These 
books were all composed after the year 1 20 of the Hijrah (A.D. 738) 
after the death of all the Companions and most of the followers, and 
after the passing away of Sa 4 id ibn-al-Musayyab (A H. 94/A.D. 

1. Famous Qur’an reader (ca A.H. 32/A.D. 652-3). See ibn-Qutayba pp. 

131-2; al-Fihrist , p. 27, Shams-al-Din al-Jazan, Ghayat al-Nihavah ft 

Tabaqat al-Ourra \ ed. Gotthelf Bergstrasser (Cairo, 1933); Vol. I, pp. 

31-2. 

202j 


713),al-Hasanal-Basri(A.H. 1 10/A.D. 728),andthemostillustrious 
of the followers. In fact, the early Muslims disliked books of 
traditions and disdained composition for fear that people would 
become dependent on those works and thereby neglect to commit 
their contents to memory and fail to read the Qur’an, meditate over 
its meaning and remember its commands. On the contrary they said, 
"Commit to memory as we have committed/’ For the same reason 
Abu-Bakr as well as several of the Companions disliked the idea of 
committing the Quran in writing in the form of a book saying, "How 
shall we do what the Prophets did not do?” Fearing the dependence 
of the people on the written copies of the Qur’an, the Companions 
first decided to leave the Qur'an uncommitted to writing and have the 
people learn it from one another through oral transmission so that 
they might have no other worry or concern. Later, however, Hadrat 
‘Umar and the other Companions, apprehensive of human weakness 
and laziness and fearful that disagreements concerning a word or an 
ambiguous ( mutashabih ) reading might arise, and having no 
authoritative origin to consult, advised that it should be committed to 
writing. Thereupon Abu-Bakr gave his consent and had the Qur’an 
collected into one volume. Nevertheless, Ahmad ibn-Hanbal was 
critical of Malik for compiling al~Muxvatta ’ and used to say, "He 
originated an innovation by doing what the Companions did not do. ” 

It has been said that the first person in Islam ever to compose 
anything was ibn-Jurayj 1 who wrote a book on history (al-athar) and 
the dialects of Qur’an (huruf al-tafasir) which he based on what he 
had heard from Mujahid, 2 4 Ata, and the companion of ibn- 4 Abbas at 
Makkah. Then came the work of Ma 4 mar ibn-Rashid a!-San‘ani 3 
which was a compilation of traditions embodying the customs of the 
Prophet. This was followed by the MuwattcC of Malik and the Jami ‘ 
(corpus) of Sufyan al-Thawri During the fourth century' (of the 

1. Abu-a’-Walid Abd-al-Mahk ibn-‘Abi-al- 4 Aziz (A.H. 150/A.D. 767). 
See ibn-Qulavbah, p. 246; al-Fihrist, p. 216; ibn-Khallikan, Vol. 1, pp 
512-13 

2. Ibn-Jabr al-Makki al-Makhzumi (A.H. 101/A D. 722-23). See ibn^Sa ‘d y 
Vol V, pp 343-4. 

3. A.H. 1 53/A. D. 770 See ibn-Qtaybah, p. 252: al-Fihrist y p. 94, Tahdhib 
al-Asma \ pp 569-70 

203 




The Book of Knowledge 


Hijrah 1 ), however, works on scholastic theology ( kalam ) appeared 
while people engaged more and more in argumentation and refutation. 
They developed a liking for debate and inclined to anecdotes and to 
their use in preaching. Consequently the science of religion ( ‘ ilmal - 
yaqin ) began to disappear and the science of the heart, research into 
the qualities of the soul, and the study of the stratagem of the devil 
became rare and unknown. All but the very' few ignored them. Then 
it became the custom to call the arguing scholastic and the story- 
teller, who embellished his words with rhymed prose, learned. This 
was primarily because laymen made up their audience, laymen who 
could not distinguish true knowledge from that which is false, while 
the acts of the Companions and their learning were concealed from 
them and, therefore, they were unable to refute these men with them. 
These men, as a result, continued to enjoy the title ‘learned’ and the 
inheriting of such appellatives went on. At the same time the science 
of the hereafter became forgotten, and the difference between 
knowledge and disputation no longer known except to a select few 
who were still able to say, whenever they were told that one person 
was more learned than another, that the former was more learned 
while the other was given to mere distinguishing between knowledge 
and the ability to dispute and argue. Thus did the science of religion 
wane during those early centuries; but how about its condition at the 
present time? Things have come to a point where anyone who would 
dare show his disapproval of the present state of affairs would run the 
risk of being called insane. It is therefore better for man to mind his 
own business and to hold his peace. 

Another characteristic expected of the learned man is that he 
be extremely careful not to be swayed by novelties and innovations 
( muhdathat ) despite the fact that all might agree to follow them, or 
be deceived by the universal acceptance gained by innovations wjiich 
nave sprung up since the days of die Companions. On the contrary 
he should be diligent in studying the conditions under which the 
Companions lived as well as their lives and works. He should find out 
to what most of them were given, whether they devoted themselves 

1. A.D. 913-1010. 


204 


The Book of Knowledge 

to teachi n g, writing, debate, law, government, guardianship of 
mortmain properties ( awqaj ), execution of wills (wasaya), devouring 
the substance of orphans, keeping the company of rulers, and 
currying favour with them or rather spent their lives in fear, sorrow 
(huzn), reflection ( tafakkur ), self-mortification, observation of the 
outward conduct and the inner self, abstinence from both minor and 
major sins, determination to ascertain the hidden appetites of the soul 
and the stratagem of the Devil and the like in the esoteric sciences. 

You should know beyond the shadow of a doubt that the most 
learned people of the time and those who are closest to the truth are 
those who resemble the Companions the most and who are best 
acquainted with the way of the early Muslims, because it were they 
who transmitted to us our faith and religion. For this reason, to the 
charge that he had contradicted some one by his actions, Hadrat Ali 
replied, “The best of us are those who are most persistent in 
following this faith. ” Therefore no one should mind contradicting the 
people of his day when he agrees with contemporaries of the Apostle 
of God. Furthermore men are apt to rationalize whatever they may 
be doing because of an instinctive disposition to do that thing, and 
their flesh does not allow them to admit that therein lies their loss of 
Paradise. Consequently they claimed that there was no access to 
Paradise except in the doing of it . For this reason al-Hasan al-Basri, 
said, “Two innovations have appeared in Islam: A man of bad 
judgment who holds that Paradise will be the reward only for those 
who see eye to eye with him, and a man of luxury and extravagance 
who worships this world; it is the source of all his dissatisfactions and 
the fountainhead of all his pleasures; he seeks nothing besides. 
Reject, therefore, these two for they are doomed to Hell fire. The 
average man finds himself hounded by a sybarite who beckons him 
to the luxuries of this world on the one hand, and by a faddist ( sahib 
hawci) who calls him to follow his whim on the other hand; but God 
has saved him from both. Aspiring to be like the righteous fathers he 
inquires about their deeds and follows in their footsteps, thus 
qualify ing himself for a great reward Be, therefore, likewise.” 

A tradition has been related on the authority of ibn-Mas‘ud 


205 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


with its chain of authorities going back to the Prophet (musnad), and 
according to another version stopping short of the Prophet ( mawquj ), 
that the Prophet said, “Of all things, two are best: the word ( Icalam ) 
and faith ( huda ). The best word is the word of God ( Icalam Allah), 
and the best faith is the faith of the Apostle of God. And beware of 
innovations because of all things, they are the worst. And even 
innovation is a heresy, while even heresy is a sin. Verily the end will 
not be delayed lest you harden your hearts. Verily whatever was 
ordained is now impending, and whatever was not ordained will not 
occur.”' 

In the course of his sermon, the Apostle of God said, “Blessed 
is he whose concern for his own faults keeps him from meddling with 
the faults of others, lives on money which he obtained without sin, 
associates with the learned and the wise, and shuns the people of 
wickedness and vice. Blessed is he who humbles himself, whose 
nature has been refined and whose heart has been reformed, who 
avoids inflicting evil upon men . Blessed is he who acts in accordance 
with his knowledge, who gives away the surplus ofhis substance and 
who withholds whatever is superfluous when he speaks, who lives 
within the law and does not overstep its bounds by introducing 
innovations.” 

Ibn-Mas‘ud used to say, “At the end of time good faith is 
better than much work.” And again, “You are now in a time wherein 
the best among you is he who is quick in the execution of affairs, but 
you will come upon a time wherein the best will be the cautious and 
deliberative, because of the abundance of misleading things.” Truly 
he spoke the truth because any one who does not at the present time 
stop and think, but follows the crowd and does what they have done, 
will perish as they have perished. 

Hudhayfah said, “Strange as it may seem, accepted practices 
of today are the taboos of a day gone by, and the taboos of today are 
the accepted practices of a day yet to come. As long as you know the 
truth and your learned men belittle it not, you will continue to 

1 . Ibn-Majah, Intro., 7:2. 

206 


prosper.” Truly he spoke the truth, because most of the accepted 
practices of the present time were taboos during the days of the 
Companions. Thus among the accepted practices of our time are 
decorating and furnishing the mosques, and expending great sums of 
money on their ornate construction and fine rugs which were then 
considered innovations . These were introduced by the pilgrims, since 
the early Muslims seldom placed anything on the ground during 
prayer. Similarly disputation and debate are among the most honoured 
disciples of the day and are numbered among the best meritorious 
works ( qarubat ); nevertheless they were among the taboos at the 
time of the Companions. The same is true of the chanting ( talhin ) of 
the Qur’an and the call for prayer, going to excess in matters of 
cleanliness and being over fastidious in matters of ceremonial purity, 
ruling clothes unclean on petty and far-fetched grounds, and, at the 
same time, being lax in ruling foods lawful and unlawful as well as 
many other like things. 

Ibn-Mas‘ud said the truth when he declared, “You are now in 
a time wherein passion is harnessed by knowledge, but there will 
come a time wherein passion will have priority over knowledge.” 
Ahmad ibn-Hanbal used to say, “They have discarded knowledge 
and followed strange things. How little is their learning! Verily God 
is our help.” Malik ibn-Anas said, “In times gone by people were 
not in the habit of looking into things as they do nowadays, nor did 
the learned men ever say that such a thing was lawful ( halal ) and the 
other unlawful ( haram ). But I have heard them say that one thing was 
desirable ( mustahab ) and the other undesirable ( makruh ). In other 
words they used to consider the degree to which one thing was 
desirable and the other undesirable, while the question of unlawfulness 
never arose, because the sinfulness of the unlawful was evident and 
clear. 

Hisham ibn-‘Urwah' used to say, “Do not ask the people of 
this day what innovations they have originated, because they have 
prepared an answer for that; rather ask them concerning the usage of 

1. Ibn-al-Zubayr (A H. 146/A D. 763). See ibn-Khallikan, Vol. IE, pp. 132 t4 

207 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


the Prophet for they are ignorant of it.” It was also the custom of 
Abu-Sulayman a!-Darani to say, “No one who had been inspired 
with something good should attempt to carry it out until he finds its 
confirmation in the traditions of the Companions. Let him then give 
praise unto God for He has approved his intentions.” This he said, 
because every' innovation, before its inception, strikes the ear and 
takes hold of the heart and cause it to deem error as truth. To conceal 
that, man summons the testimony of tradition to his aid. For this 
reason, when Manvan 1 introduced the pulpit ( minbar ) into the 
sanctuary’ ( al-musalla ) 2 at the time of the feast service, 3 Abu Sa‘id 
al-Khudri 4 approached him saying, “O Marwan! What is this 
innovation?” Manvan replied, “This is not an innovation. On the 
contrary this is better than the practice you advocate because the 
crowd has become very big, and I desire to have my voice reach all 
of them.” But Abu-Sa‘id objected saying, “By Allah you will never 
do anything better than the things I know and advocate. By Allah I 
shall not follow you in prayer today.” Abu-Sa‘id disapproved of the 
action of Marwan because the Apostle of God used to lean, during 
the sermon of the feast and the prayer for rain {al-istisqa), against a 
bow or a cane but not against a pulpit. 3 Thus we read in the famous 
tradition, “Whoever will introduce an alien element into our religion, 
the same is an evil man.” 6 In another tradition we have, “The 
execration of God and all the angels is upon him who will deceive my 
people.” It was then asked, “0 Apostle of God! Who will deceive 

1 . Fourth Umayyad caliph (A.H. 64-5/A.D. 683-5). 

2. A place of prayer outside the town and mainly in cemeteries. Following 
the Prophet it was customary to hold the service of the two feasts (al- 
idayn), namely al-Fitr and al-Adha, in such musallas. See al -Bukhari, al- 
‘idayn: 6. 

3. Either al-Fitr or al-Adha. The pulpit, as a part of the equipment of the 
mosque goes back to Muhammad (S.A.W.) himself who raised such a 
pulpit in A.H. 7/A.D. 628-9; see ibn-Sa 'd, Vol. II, Pt. 2,pp. 9-13. For the 
innovation of Marwan, see al-Bukhari, al-'idayn: 6. 

4. Sa‘d iibn-Malik ibn-Sinan (A.H. 74/A.D. 693-4). See ibn-Qutaybah p. 
136; Tahdhib al-Asma', pp. 723-4. 

5. Cf. al-Bukhari, Istisqa': 1, 7, 18; Muslim , Istisqa': 1-3: abu-Dawud, 
istisqa': 7; ibn-Mqjah, Salah, 86:5. 

6. Cf. abu-Dawud, al-Sunnah : 5. 


your people?” The Apostle replied, “He who- will introduce an 
innovation and will lead men to follow it.” 1 The Apostle also said, 
“Verily God had an angel who cries out daily saying, ‘He who 
violates the sunnah of the Apostle of God will not enjoy the benefit 
of his intercession’.” 2 The relation of him who transgresses against 
religion by introducing into it innovations contrary to the sunnah to 
him who commits an offence is like that of him who rebels against 
the king and attempts to destroy his government to him who disobeys 
the sovereign in one particular service. The offence of the latter may 
be pardoned but not that of the former. 

One ofthe learned men said, “To ignore what the Fathers have 
discussed is insolence, and to discuss what they have ignored is 
ostentatious.” Another learned man said, “Truth is not a light 
matter: He who oversteps its bounds, transgresses; he who fells short 
of it, fails; and he who aligns himself with it, is satisfied.” The 
Prophet said, “Follow the middle position to which the high is 
levelled down and the low is levelled up.” Ibn-‘ Abbas said, “Error 
is sweet to the hearts of its followers.” 

God said, “Quit those who make their religion a sport and a 
pastime.” 3 And again, “Shall he, the evil of whose deeds are so 
tricked out to him that he deemeth them good, be treated like him who 
seeth things aright? 4 Thus everything which has been introduced 
since the time of the Companions, beyond the demands of need or 
necessity, is nothing but sport and pastime 

It has been related that the Devil ( lblis ) 5 sent his soldiers out 
at the time of the Companions, but they returned to him distressed. 
Thereupon he asked them what the matter was, to which they replied, 
“We have never seen the like of these men; we cannot make any 
headway against them and they have worn us out.” The Devil then 
said, “Verily you will not be able to overcome them, because they 
accompanied their Prophet and witnessed the revelation of their God. 
But there will come after them another group against whom you will 

1. Unidentified. 2. Unidentified. 

3. Surah, VI: 69 4 Surah, XXXV: 9. 

5. From Gr. Six Boyos. 


208 


15 


209 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


prevail.” When the followers ( al-tabi 'un) came along the Devil sent 
his soldiers out again among them, but they returned to him 
disappointed and said, “We have not seen anybody more amazing 
than these men. We trap them into one sin after another but at the end 
of the day they begin to beseech the forgiveness of God and He 
ans wers their prayers and changes theirs sins into good works.” The 
Devil replied, “You will never prevail over these men because of the 
integrity of their belief in the unity of God and their obedience to the 
sunnah of their Prophet. But after them will come others who will 
i frlight your hearts. You will play with them as you wish, and will 
lead them by the reins of their passions as you please. If they will ask 
for forgiveness of God He will not grant their request; nor will they 
repent so that God might change their sins into good works.” 

And so after the first century (of the Hijrah) there came 
another group of men among whom the Devil kindled passions, and 
so tricked out to them their innovations that they deemed them lawful, 
and set them up as their religion. They neither asked the forgiveness 
of God nor repented from their sins. Consequently their enemies 
prevailed over them and led them anywhere they desired. 

The question may be asked, how did the person who related 
this know what the Devil had said especially since no one has seen the 
Devil or talked with him? Then you shall know that those whose 
hearts have been sanctified have the secrets of heaven made known 
to than either by inspiration ( ilham ) which dawns upon them from 
where they know not, or by actual vision ( al-ru ‘ya al-sadiqah) in 
their sleep, or in their wakefulness, which unfolds to them the 
mysteries through the contemplation of types (amthilah), just as in 
sleep. This is the highest rank, and is one of the high ranks of 
prophecy, just as actual vision is one part of forty-six parts of 
prophecy. 

Beware, therefore, lest your share of this knowledge be the 
Amal of whatever falls beyond the limits of your own finite mind, 
because therein the proud and boastful learned men who claim that 
they have encompassed all intellectual knowledge have met their 


doom. In fact ignorance is better than a mind which calls for the denial 
of such things to the saints of God. For he who denies the saint s such 
things is of necessity compelled to deny and reject the Prophets, and 
will, therefore, be completely outside the pale of religion. In this 
connexion one of the gnostics ( ‘ arijun ) said, “Verily the abdal have 
vanished from the earth and have concealed themselves from the 
world, because they cannot stand the sight of the learned men of the 
time who in the opinion of the abdal are ignorant of God, but in their 
own opinion and in the opinion of the ignorant are deemed learned.” 

Sahl al-Tustan said, “Indeed one of the greatest sins is to be 
unaware of ignorance.” To watch the life of the crowd and hear the 
words of the foolish are easier (to the abdal than all the babel of the 
so-called learned. 

Furthermore no words of any learned man who has pursued 
this world should be heeded; on the contrary whatever such a man 
would say should be questioned, because every man would pursue 
what appeals to him and would reject whatever does not agree with 
his desire. For this reason God said, “Obey not the man whose heart 
We have made careless of the remembrance of Us, who followeth his 
lusts, and whose ways are unbridled.”' The trespassing laymen are 
happier than those who are ignorant of the path of religion but believe 
that they are learned. For the trespassing layman admits his 
shortcomings, asks Allah for His forgiveness, and repents ofhis 
while the ignorant man who regards himself learned addresses 
himself to those branches of knowledge which will serve him as 
means whereby he will be able to gain this world through the path of 
religion. He neither repents of his sin nor asks the fbigiveness of 
Allah, rather he persists in his sin until death. And since that prevails 
on most men, except those who have been rendered infallible by God, 
so that all hope of reforming them has disappeared, the safest thing 
for the cautious man of religion is to seek seclusion ( uzlah) and 
solitude {infir ad). This will be discussed in the Book on Seclusion. 
For this reason Yusuf ibn-Asbat wrcte to Hudhayfah al-Mar'ashi,' 

~ Surah, XVHI: 27. 


210 


211 



The Book of Knowledge 


“What do you think of one who has not yet been able to find anyone 
to join with him in the praise of God who is not a criminal and 
companionship with him is sin?” In others words Yusuf ibn-Abas 
was not able to find any congenial company; and he was right, 
the company of people is never free ofbackbiting and gossip 
or die necessity of overlooking evil. The best that the learned man can 
do is either to benefit others by his knowledge or to benefit himself 
by the knowledge of others . Had this poor man but realized that it was 
not possible for him to impart any benefit without its being tainted 
with the blemishes ofhypocrisy and the desire of wealth and position, 
he would have known that the receiver ofhis benefit is bent on making 
it a means for gaining this world and an instrument for evil. In that 
case he would be his aid and accomplice, an auxiliary- who would 
provide him with his tools and instruments. He would be like the 
merchant who would supply the brigands with their swords. For 
knowledge is like the sword, its proper use is in the service of good 
as die proper use of the sword is in the execution of raids (ghazw ). 
Consequently no merchant is justified in selling his swords to men 
from whose conditions he can tell that they- will employ his merchandise 
to canv out their highway robberies. 

These, then, are twelve of the characteristics of the learned 
men of the hereafter, each one of which represents several of the 
qaaAifes of the early learned men. Be, therefore, one of two things: 
f i t ly *- a man who possesses these qualities, or a man who, while 
acknowledging them admits his failure to live up to them. But never 
be the third: one of neither possesses these qualities nor admits his 
failure Otherwise you will confuse yourself and regard religion only 
as a means of securing the luxuries of this world, and will liken the 
lives of the wicked to those of the versatile learned men. Your 
ignorance and rebellion will land you into the midst of those who are 
doomed to destruction and despair. Weseek refuge in God against the 
ri ecfi t of Satan through which many have perished, and we ask to God 
to vouchsafe that we become one of those who are not deceived by 
this world, nor moved to deny God because of their conceit. 

I . A H. 207/A.D. 822; see al-Sharani, Vol. I, p. 53. 


SECTION VII 

On the Intellect, its Noble Nature, its Definition, and its 

Divisions 

The Noble Nature of the Intellect: It will be superfluous to 
show the noble nature of the intellect (al- ‘ aql) especially because 
through it the noble nature of knowledge has been revealed. Intellect 
is the source and fountainhead ofknowledge as well as its foundation. 
Knowledge springs from it as the fruit from the tree and the light from 
the sun and vision from the eye. How then could that which is the 
means of happiness in this world and the next not be noble or how 
could it ever be doubted? The beasts, despite their weak understanding, 
respect the intellect, so that the largest; most ferocious, and strongest 
among them, fear the very sight of man, because they sense his 
superiority over them, which is the result of his native resourcefulness. 
For this reason the Prophet said, “The position of the chief (shaykh) 
in his tribal organisation is like unto that of the Prophet among his 
people.”' This however, is not because of the abundant wealth of the 
shaykh, nor because ofhis great person, or his enormous power, but 
rather because ofhis rich experience, which is the fruit ofhis intellect 
( aql). For this reason you find that the Turks and the Kurds as well 
as the ruffians among the Arabs and all other people, despite the feet 
that they are so close in their lives to the beasts, respect their shaykhs 
instinctively. Similarly, when several of the rebellious Arabs, who 
had made up their minds to kill the Prophet, saw him and beheld his 
noble countenance, they feared him, and there shone on them through 
his face the radiant light of prophecy, although it was only latent in 
his soul in the same manner as the intellect. 

1 . Unidentified. 


213 


The Book of Knowledge 


To be sure the noble nature of the intellect is perceived 
instinctively. It is our purpose, however, to relate what the tradition 
and the Qur’an say concerning its noble nature. Thus we find in the 
Qur’an that Allah called it light when He, raid, Allahis the Light of 
the Heavens and Earth. His Light is like a niche in which is a lamp 
— the lamp encased in glass — the glass, as it were, a glistening 
star.”' The knowledge derived therefrom was called a spirit, a 
revelation, and a life. Said Allah, “Thus have We sent the Spirit to 
thee with a revelation, by Our command .” 2 And again, “Shall the 
dead, whom We have quickened, and for whom We have ordained a 
light wherebv he may walk among men, be like him, whose likeness 
is in the darkness, whence he will not come forth ?’ 3 Furthermore, 
whenever Allah mentions light and darkness He means thereby 
knowledge and ignorance respectively, as is evident in His words, 
“And He will bring them out of the darkness into the light .” 4 

The Prophet said, “O ye men! Know Allah and be ruled by 
in triw* then ye will know what ye have been enjoined and ye have 
been forbidden. Know ye that intellect is your glory before Allah. He 
who obeyeth Allah, although his looks may be ugly, his rank lowly, 
his station modest, and his appearance shabby, is intelligent; but he 
who disobeyeth Allah, although his looks may be good, his rank 
CTt altf d . his station noble, his appearance fair, and his power of 
speech sharp and fluent, the same is ignorant. For the apes and the 
pigs are, in the sight of God, saner than he who disobeyeth. Therefore 
be not deceived by the honour which the men of this world receive: 
verily th ey are of those who are doomed .” 5 The Prophet also said, 
“The first thing which Allah created was the intellect. On creating it 
Allah ordered it saying, ‘Come forth’, and it came forth. He then 
ordered it saying, ‘Return’, and it returned. Thereupon Allah said, 
‘By My power and glory I have created nothing more reverent 
towards Me than thee. Through thee I take and through thee I give, 
through thee I reward and through thee I punish”. 

I. Surah XXIV: 35 2. Surah XLII: 52. 

3. Surah VI: 122. 4. Surah V 18. 

3. Unidentified. 


The Book of Knowledge 


Y ou may ask, if this intellect is an accident ( * arad ), how could 
it have been created before all other substances, and if it is an essence 
( jawhar ), how could it be a self-existent (qa 'im binafsih) essence and 
not be isolated? If you should ask such a question, then you should 
know that it belongs to the science of revelation ( 7 Im al-mukashafah), 
and, therefore, it is not proper to discuss it under the science of 
practical religion ( ‘ilm al-mu ‘amalah) which is our present concern. 

It has been related on the authority of Hadrat Anas that a group 
of people once commended a certain man in the presence of the 
Prophet and praised hm excessively. Thereupon the Prophet said, 
“What kind of an intellect hath that man?” But they replied saying, 
“We tell these about his diligence in prayer and about the various 
good works he doeth and thou inquirest from us concerning his 
intellect!” The Prophet answered and said. “The fool doctl^ more 
harm through his ignorance than doeth the wicked through his 
wickedness. Moreover, men will not advance to a higher degree of 
proximity to God except in proportion to their intellect.” 

It has also been related on the authority of Hadrat ‘Umar that 
the Apostle of Allah said, “Man doth not gain anything like a worthy 
intellect which leadeth him to righteousness and dissuadeth him from 
sin; nor doth his belief become complete and his religion upright until 
his intellect matureth.” And again. “Verily man will attain the rank 
of the fasting worshipper through his good character; but no man will 
be blessed with good character until his intellect matureth. Then and 
only then will his belief become complete, and not until then will he 
obey Allah and disobey the Devil.” 

It was also related on the authority of Hadrat Abu-Sa‘id al- 
Khudri that the Apostle of Allah said, “For everything there is a 
support, and the support of the believer is his intellect; in proportion 
to his intellect will his worship be.” For have you not heard the words 
of the sinners in Hell: “Had we but hearkened or understood, we 
would not have been among the dwellers of the flames.” 1 It has also 
been related on the authority of Hadrat ‘ Umar that he himself once 

1 Surah, LXVD: 10. 


214 


215 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


asked Tamim al-Dari 2 saying, “What holds the supreme authority 
among you?” Tamim replied, “The intellect.” Thereupon ‘Umar 
said, “Thou hast said the truth. I have asked the Apostle of God the 
same question and he gave me the same reply saying. “I have asked 
Gabriel what the supreme authority' was and he answered, ‘The 
intellect’.” 

It was also related on the authority of Al-Bara’ ibn-Azib 3 that 
once upon a time the questions which were submitted to the Apostle 
became too many, and thereupon he said, “O men! For everything 
there is a mainstay, and the mainstay of man is his intellect. The most 
convincing and the most authoritative among you is he who has the 
best intellect.” It was also related on the authority of Hadrat Abu- 
Hurayrah that when the Apostle of Allah returned from the raid of 
Uhud he heard the people say that so and so was braver than so and 
so, and so and so fought better than so and so, and so on. Thereupon 
he said, “Ye have not knowledge concerning thing.” “How, O 
Apostle of Allah?” they' inquired. He replied, “Verily they have 
fought, each according to the intellect which Allah hath given him. 
Their victory and hope were also proportional to their intellect. 
Consequently those of them who were injured in the fray were injured 
at various stages ( manazil ), and on the day of resurrection they will 
occupy those stages, each according to his intentions and intellect. 

It was also related on the authority of Al-Bara’ ibn-‘ Azib that 
the Prophet said, “The angels have been earnest and diligent in their 
obedience to Allah wholly through their intellect; while the believers 
among the children of Adam have endeavoured to do His will as far 
as their intellect has allowed. Consequently the most obedient among 
them possesses the greatest intellect.” Again it was reported on the 
authority of Hadrat ‘ A’ishah that she once said, “O Apostle of Allah! 
Wherein do people excel one another in this world?” He replied, “In 

2. A.H.40/A.D. 660-61 . See ibn-qutaybah, p. \A9,ibn-Sa‘d,Vo\. VD.Pt. 2, 
pp. 129-30; al-Suyuti, Husn al-Muhadarah fi-Akhbar Misrw-al-Qahirah 
(Cairo, 1327), Vol. I, pp. 76-7. 

3. A.H. 72/A.D. 691-2. See ibn-Qutaybah, p 166; ibn-Sa ‘d, Vol. IV, Pt. 2, 
pp. 80-83 


intellect. And in the hereafter?” she added. “In intellect,” he again 
replied. Then ‘A’ishah said, “But are they not rewarded according 
to their works?” To which the Apostle replied: “O ‘A’ishah! Have 
they ever achieved anything except in proportion to what God has 
given them of intellect? Their works will always be in proportion to 
the intellect which God has given them, and their reward will be in 
proportion to their works.” 

It was also related on the authority of ibn-‘Abbas that the 
Apostle of Allah said, “For everything there is an instrument and a 
tool, and the instrument of the believer is his intellect: for everything 
there is a mainstay, and the mainstay of man is his intellect; for 
everything there is a support, and the support of religion is the 
intellect; for every group of men there is a goal, and the goal of the 
worshippers is the intellect; for every' people there is a missionary 
(who calls them to the true faith), and the missionary of the devout 
is the intellect; for every' merchant there are goods and merchandise, 
and the merchandise of the scholars is the intellect; for every house 
there is a keeper, and the keeper of the houses of the saints is the 
intellect; for every ruin there is rehabilitation, and the rehabilitation 
of death is the intellect; for every man there is an offspring who bears 
his name and perpetuates his memory, and the offsprings of the 
saints, who bear their names and perpetuate their memory, are their 
intellects; and finally for every journey there is a shelter, and the 
shelter of the believers is the intellect.” 

The Prophet also said, “Verily the believer who is most 
beloved of Allah is he who toils in the service of Allah and gives 
counsel to his people, whose understanding is complete; who 
admonishes himself and consequently sees the truth and acts 
accordingly all the days of his life, with the result that he himself 
prospers and leads others to success.” And again, “The man who 
possesses the most mature mind among you is he who fears God 
most, fillfilling best what He enjoined and desisting from what He has 
forbidden, although that man may be the least willing to obey.” 


1. A.H. 72/A.D. 691-2. See ibn-Qutaybah, p. 166; ibn-Sa d, Vol. IV, Pt. 2, pp. 80-83. 


216 


217 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


On the truth concerning the intellect and ns 

DIVISIONS 

Let it be known that people have disagreed on the definition of 
.he intellect and the truth concerning it. Many have forgotten that the 
term has been applied to several things, a fact which has led to the 
existing disagreement concerning the definition of the term. The 
truth, however, is that the word intellect ( aql) is a term used 
interchangeably for four distinct meanings in the same way as the 
term for eye has been used for several meanings. In the case of such 
words, therefore, no one single definition should be expected to cover 
the several meanings of the term. On the contrary each meaning 
should have its individual definition. 

First it is the quality which distinguishes man from the other 
animals and prepare him to understand and grasp the theoretical 
sciences ( nazariyah ), and master the abstract (Jikriyah ) disciplines. 
This is exactly what Al-Harith ibn-Asad al-Muhasibi meant when he 
said in defining the intellect ( aql) as an instinct ( gharizah ) through 
which the theoretical sciences are grasped and understood. It is as 
though it were a light cast into the heart preparing it thereby to grasp 
things and understand them. Hence he who denies this and limits the 
intellect to daruriyah knowledge only, is wrong because he who is 
unaware of the existence of these facts as well as he who is fast asleep, 
in so far as they possess that instinct, are called intelligent, although 
they lack the knowledge of these facts. And just as life is an instinct 
whereby the body is disposed to carry out the voluntary ( ikhtiyariyah ) 
movements and respond to sense perception ( idrakat hissiyah), so is 
the intellect an instinct whereby some of the animals are disposed to 
grasp ■ le theoretical sciences. Furthermore if it were conceivable to 
regard the donkey equal to man in instincts and sense perception and 
say that there was no difference between them except that God, just 
as a matter of course, imbued man with sciences with which He did 
not bless the donkey and the animals, it would also be conceivable to 
regard the inanimate objects equal to the donkey in life and say that 
there was no difference between them except that God, just as a 
matter of course, endowed the donkey with some particular 

218 


movements. But if the donkey were inanimate and lifeless, it would 
have been necessary to say that every movement which the donkey 
might perform must have been originated in it by God in that 
particular sequence. And just as it has been necessary to say that the 
donkev would not differ from inanimate objects in movement except 
for an instinct characteristic of it which is expressed by the word life; 
so would it be in the case of man in relation to the animal, he differs 
from it in his grasp of the theoretical sciences through an instinct 
which is expressed by the word intellect. This is just like the mirror 
which is distinguished from other objects by its ability to reflect 
images and colours through a particular quality' peculiar of it, namely 
its polish. The same is true of the eye which is distinguished from the 
forehead in several qualities and characteristics which enable it to 
see. Hence the relation of that instinct, (namely, the intellect), to the 
sciences is similar to that of the eye to vision; while the relation of the 
Qur’an and the law to that instinct in so far as it leads to the unfolding 
of the sciences is like that of the light of the sun to seeing. In this 
manner, therefore, should this instinct be defined and understood. 

Secondly the word aql is applied to that knowledge which 
makes its appearance even in the infant who discerns the possibility 
of possible things (ja izat) and the impossibility of impossible things 
(, mustahilat ), such as the knowledge that the two are greater than the 
one and that the one individual cannot be in two different places at 
the same time . It is what one of the scholastics meant when he defined 
the word ‘aql as some axiomatic ( daruriyah ) knowledge, such as the 
possibility- of possible things and the impossibility of impossible 
things. This definition is right, as it stands, because this knowledge 
is existent and the application of the word ‘aql to it is clear. What is 
wrong, however, is to deny that instinct, and to hold that only this kind 
of knowledge exists. 

In the third place the word 'aql has been applied to that 
knowledge which is acquired through experience (empirical 
knowledge), in the course of events. Thus he who has been taught by 
experience and schooled by time is generally called intelligent (‘aqil), 
while he who lacks these qualifications is called unintelligent, stupid 

219 



The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


and ignorant. Here, therefore, is another type of knowledge which is 
called ‘’aql. 

In the fourth place the word ‘ aql is used when the power of the 
instinct develops to such an extent that its owner will be able to tell 
what the end will be, and consequently be will conquer and subdue 
his appetite which hankers for immediate pleasure-. Whenever such 
a power obtains, its owner, in view of the fact that he embarks upon 
an undertaking, or refrains from it only after athorough consideration 
of its end rather than in answer to the urge of a carnal appetite, is 
called intelligent. This, too, isamongthe peculiarities which distinguish 
man from the other animals. 

As to these four usages of the word ‘ aql it should be pointed 
out that the first is the foundation of the other three, their origin and 
fountain-head. The second is the branch nearest to the first while the 
third is an offshoot of both the first and the second combined, since 
through the power of the instinct and axiomatic knowledge, are the 
empirical sciences acquired. The fourth is the final fruit and ultimate 
aim. The first two are native ( bi-al-tab ’), while the last two are 
acquired ( bi-al-iktisab ). For this reason Hadrat ‘Ali said: 

Knowledge is of two kinds: native and acquired. 

But no acquired knowledge is of any use, 

If there is no native knowledge. 

Just as the light of the sun is useless 
When the light of the eyes is shut off. 

The first, namely the native ( matbu '), was intended by the 
Prophet when he sad, “Allah has not created a more honoured thing 
than the intellect ( i aql) ”1he second, namely the acquired ( masmu ), 
was intended by the Prophet when he said, “When men draw near 
unto Allah through nighteousness and good works, draw thou near 
unto Him through thy learning.” The same is meant by the words of 
the Apostle of Allah when he said to Abu-al-Darda’, “Increase in 
learning and thou wilt draw nearer unto God.” Abu-al-Darda’ 
exclaimed, “May my father and mother be thy ransom! How can I 
do that?” The Apostle replied, “Avoid the prohibitions of Allah and 


fulfil His commandments and thou wilt be wise; do the good works 
and thou wilt increase in glorv and honour in this world and wilt 
receive a place of favour and exaltation from thy Lord in the world 
to come.” 

It was also related on the authority of Hadrat Sa‘id ibn-al- 
Musavvab that ‘Umar, Ubayy ibn K‘ab, and Abu-Hurayrah called 
one day on the Apostle of Allah and said, “O Apostle of Allah! Who 
is the most learned of men? He said, “The wise ” “Who is the most 
worshipful of men?” they’ asked, “The wise,” replied the Apostle. 
Again they said, “And who is the most excellent of men?” And again 
he replied. “The wise.” Thereupon they said, “Is not the wise man 
he whose manliness is complete, whose eloquence is manifest, whose 
generosity is active, and whose rank is exalted?” The Apostle 
replied, “ All these are of the things of this world while the hereafter 
is reserved by God for the pious who fear Him. Verily the wise man 
is he who is pious, although he may be abject and despised in this 
world.” According to another tradition the Prophet said, “Verily the 
wise man is he who believes in Allah, accepts His Apostles, and 
obeys His commandments.” 

It is very' likely that the basic use of the word ‘ aql has been for 
that instinct, [native intellect], and the same is true of its technical 
use. It was, however, applied to knowledge because the latter is, as 
it were, its fruit. And just as a thing is known by its fruit so that, as 
a result, it is said, “The fear of Allah is knowledge,” and “He who 
fears Allah is learned,” because the fear of God is the fruit of 
knowledge, so has the word ‘ aql been used metaphorically for other 
than that instinct, [native intellect] . It is not, however, our purpose to 
discuss language. All we mean is that these four parts exist and that 
the term ‘ aql is applied to all of them alike. Furthermore there is no 
dispute regarding the existence of all but the first part, namely the 
instinct. There is no doubt, however, that it exists; in fact it is the 
origin of the other three while all the forms of knowledge, are as it 
were, inherent in it by nature and come to light when some cause 
which will bring them out takes place. Such is the case with 
knowledge that it would seem as though there was no external 


220 


TT1 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


influence whatever in its appearance: it merely was latent in that 
instinct and later appeared. This can be illustrated by the water in the 
bowels of the earth: it appears on digging and collects at the bottom 
of the well and can be distinguished by the senses; yet throughout the 
whole operation no new element was introduced. The same is true of 
the oil in almond nuts and the attar in rose petals. For this reason 
Allah said, “And when thy Lord brought forth their descendants 
from the reins of the sons of Adam and took them to witness against 
themselves, ‘Am I not,’ said He, ‘vour Lord?’ They said, ‘Yes, we 
witness it’.” 1 what is meant here is confession in their souls, not 
verbal profession, because men are divided in the case of verbal 
profession into two groups, believers and unbelievers. Consequently 
Allah said, “If you ask them who created them, they will be sure to 
say, ‘Allah’.” This means that if they would only consider their 
condition, their souls and hearts would subscribe to the fact that God 
had created them (in accordance with) “the nature (fitrah) which 
God has given them.” 2 In other words every human being is created 
and bom a believer; still more every human being is bom with an 
inherent knowledge of reality; inherent since it is readily disposed to 
perceive reality. With belief installed by nature in the human soul, 
men have split, into two groups; the one has turned away from that 
belief and has forgotten all about it — it comprises the unbelievers; 
the other has pondered and remembered, resembling therein one who 
has a witness, and, in his oversight, for a while has forgotten al 1 about 
it, but finally has remembered it. For this reason Allah said, “Haply 
they may remember;” 1 and “that those endued with understanding 
may recall and remember;” 4 and again, “And remember the favour 
of God upon you, and His covenant which He had covenanted with 
you;” 5 and again, “And we have rendered the Qur’an available as 
a sign to be remembered — but is there any one who will remember?” 6 
It is not, therefore, far-fetched to call this kinds, remembrance 
( tadhakkur ). Thus remembrance is of two kinds: the one is to recall 
a picture which once existed in one’s mind but has since disappeared, 

7 . Surah VO: 171. 2. Surah XLffl: 87. 

3 Cf. Surah XXX: 29. 4. Surahs H 221, XIV: 30 

5 Surah XXXVIII: 28 6. Surah V: 10 


while the other is to recall a picture which is inherent in one’s mind 
by nature {fit rah). 

These facts are evident to him who exercises his insight, but 
are abstruse to him who is given to blind imitation and simple 
acceptance of things on authority {taqlid) rather than to investigation 
and personal observation. Consequently you find such men entangled 
in these and similar verses, hopelessly lost in the interpretation of 
remembrance ( tadhakkur ) and the confession of the souls, and 
continually imagining that the traditions of the Prophet and the 
Qur’an are full of contradictions. 1 Such an attitude may take hold of 
him so that he will regard them with contempt, believing that they are 
utterly incoherent. He is like a blind man who enters a house and, 
stumbling over some vessels says, “Why were not these vessels 
removed from the way and returned to their places?” He is then told 
that they are in their right places and what is wrong is his sight. The 
same is true of the disorder of the insight; in fact it is worse because 
the soul is like the horseman while the body represents the horse, and 
the blindness of the horseman is more serious and disastrous than that 
of the horse. The relation between insight and sight is evident. Thus 
Allah said, “His heart falsified not what he saw,” 2 and again. “And 
thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of the Heavens and of the 
Earth.” 3 The opposite of both insight and sight has been called 
blindness. Thus Allah said, “For surely it is not the eyes that are 
blind, but blind are the hearts which are in the breasts.” 4 As to those 
things which were revealed to the prophets, some were revealed 
through the sight and some through the insight, but both were called 
seeing {ru ’ayh). In short he whose insight is not keen will grasp 
nothing of religion except its husks and outward forms rather than its. 
pith and truth. These, then are the things to which the word "aql is 
applied. 

On the Intellectual Disparity among men 

Men have disagreed concerning the disp arity which exists 

T~ Surah LIV: 17 2. Surah LID: D. 

3. Surah VIL 75. 4. Surah XXII: 45. 


222 


223 


The Book of Knowledge 


The Book of Knowledge 


among their intellects ( ‘aql ). But there is no use in repeating the 
arguments of those of little knowledge. It is more important to 
proceed immediately to the declaration of the truth. The obvious truth 
in this case is that this disparity pervades all the four parts of the 
intellect except the second, namely axiomatic (damn) knowledge, 
such as the possibility' of possible things and the impossibility' of 
impossible things. Thus he who comprehends tha: iwo are greater 
than one will also comprehend the impossibility for one object being 
in two different places at the same time, or for a thing being both 
eternal ( qadim ) and originated (hadith). The same is true of all other 
similar facts and whatever is comprehended with certain 
comprehension free of any doubt. The three other parts, however, are 
subject to disparity-. 

As to the fourth, namely, the ability ofthe power of the instinct 
to conquer the appetite, the disparity in it among men is evident and 
clear; in fact it is evident and clear that, at times, even the individual 
betrays a certain degree of disparity therein. This is sometimes the 
result of variation in the intensity of different appetites. A wisemen 
may be able to overcome one appetite more readily than another; but 
the problem is not restricted to this only. The young man may fail to 
overcome the appetite of sex and desist from fornication, but when 
he advances in age and his understanding becomes mature he will be 
able to subdue his lust. On the other hand hypocrisy and pride 
increase and grow stronger with age. 

This disparity may also be the result of difference in the 
mastery' of the knowledge which reveals the evil of the other 
appetites. Thus a physician may be able to abstain from some of the 
harmful foods, while another man may fail simply because he lacks 
medical knowledge, although he may be the physician’s peer in 
intellect and of the same belief in the harmful effects of those foods. 
Again the more mature the physician’s intellect, the stronger will his 
fear be. Hence fear is an aid in the service of intellect, an instrument 
with which to overcome and break appetites. Similarly, the learned 
man is more capable of renouncing sin than the ignorant, because his 
knowledge of the evils of sin is greater. I mean the true learned men 


and not those of the flowing robes who dote and rave and prate of 
things they know little about. 

If this disparity is due to appetite it will have nothing to do with 
the disparity' of intellect, but if it is due to knowledge, then we shall 
call this kind of know ledge, intellect, because it strengthens the native 
intellect and hence the disparity will be that of the particular 
knowledge then involved, after which it will also be named. It may 
also be caused by disparities in the native intelellect the ability' of 
which to stamp out appetite becomes inevitably stronger as it grows 
more powerful. 

As to the third part, namely, empirical knowledge ( ulum al- 
lajarib), the disparity of men in it cannot be denied. They differ 
therein in the number of times they are right in their quickness to 
comprehend. This may be the result of either disparity in the instinct, 
(i.e. native intellect), or disparity in practice and experience. In the 
case of the first, i.e. the instinct, which is the origin, the disparity 
cannot be denied. It is like a luminary which shines upon the soul, 
whose dawning and first rays begin to illuminate the soul at the age 
of discrimination and continues to grow and increase very gradually 
until it reaches its fullness around the age of forty. Or like the light 
of the morning, the beginnings of which are hard to discern but it 
increases little by little until it attains its fullness at the rising of the 
sun. The disparity of insight is like that of eye sight where the 
difference between the weak-sighted man and the keen-sighted is 
quite evident. 

The law of God operates universally among all His creatures 
and follows the principles of gradual development. Thus the sex 
instinct does not appear at puberty all at one time suddenly; rather it 
appears little by little gradually. The same is true of all the other 
forces and facilities. In fact he who denies the disparity of men in this 
instinct is loose outside the confines of sanity, and he who thinks that 
the intellect of the Prophet is the same as that of any ofthe outlandish 
peasants and desert ruffians is himself filthier than any of those 
peasants. 

225 


224 


16 


The Book of Knowledge 


Furthermore how could the disparity of instinct (i.e. the native 
intellect) be denied when without it men would not have varied in their 
ability to understand knowledge, nor would they have been divided 
into the stupid who fail to understand anything except after long and 
tedious explanation by ateacher, the brilliant who respond to the least 
sign, and the perfect from whose soul truth emanates without any 
previous instruction. Thus Allah said, “Whose oil would well nigh 
shine out, even though fire touched it not! It is light upon light .” 1 Such 
are the Prophets to whom recondite things are clarified in their inward 
droughts without having learnt or heard anything of the sort. This is 
expressed by the word inspiration ( ilham ). The Prophet expressed 
the same thing when he said, “Verily the holy spirit whispered into 
my heart and said, ‘Love anyone, thou shalt part from him; live 
anyway thou desirest, thou shalt verily die; do anything thou wilt — 
thou shalt be accordingly rewarded’.” This kind of imparting 
information by the angels to the Prophets is different from explicit 
revelation which involves hearing a definite voice with the ear and 
seeing the angel with the eye. Consequently the stage (of revelation) 
has been described as whispering into the heart ( al nafth fi al-ru). As 
to the stages of revelation ( wahi ), they are many, but to embark on 
a discussion of them under practical religion ( ilm al-muk ashafah) 
is not fitting, because they fall under the science of revelation ( ilm 
al-muk ashafah). Do not think, however, that the knowledge of the 
stages of revelation requires that a person be himself a receiver of 
revelation, because it is not unlikely for a sick physician to know the 
different stages of health or for the trespassing learned man to know 
the various stages of justice despite the fact that he lacks justice. For 
knowledge is one thing and the existence of what is known is another. 
Consequently not everyone who knows what prophethood and 
sainthood are will be a Prophet or a saint, and not every one who 
knows what piety and godliness are will be pious or godly. 


That men are divided into those who take notice by themselves 
and understand those who do not understand except through warning 


1 Surah XXIV: 35. 


226 


'he Book of Knowledge 


and instruction, and those who benefit from neither, is like the 
division of the bosom of the earth into parts where water collects and 
increases until it brusts out by itself into springs of living water, parts 
where water collects but cannot be reached without digging, and arid 
parts where not even digging will avail. This is true of the disparity 
of men in native intellect. Attesting to the disparity of the intellect is 
a tradition narrated by ‘Abdullah ibn-Salam to the effect that the 
Prophet at the end of a long conversation, described the throne and 
stated that the angels once asked Allah saying, “O our Lord! Hast 
thou created aught greater than the throne?” Allah replied, “Yes, the 
intellect.” The angels said, “How great is it?” Allah answered and 
said, “Verily no one can grasp its greatness. Can you number the 
sand of the sea?” They said, “No. ” Allah then replied, “Verily I have 
created the intellect in different kinds as numerous as the sand of die 
sea. Some men were given one grain, others two, three and four 
grains, still others received a good portion, others a portion equalling 
a camel-load, and others even greater.” 

You may say, “Why then do some groups among the Sufis 
disparage the intellect and reason as well as the rational and the 
reasonable?” You should know, then, that the reason for it is that men 
have transferred the term intellect or reason ('aql) and the term 
rational or reasonable ( ma qul) from their real and original meaning 
to another and false meaning, namely argumentation and debate over 
contradictions and requisites, which is scholastic theology. 
Consequently the Sufis could not tell that men have erred in this 
terminology, especially since it has not been possible to remove that 
from their minds in view of its current and well established usage. As 
a result they disparaged reason and rationalism. Could it be imugWd 
however, that the light of the insight, through which God is known 
and the truthfulness of His Apostle is recognized, will ever be 
disparaged or belittled when God Himself praised it? And if it were 
ever disparaged what other thing could be praised? But if the 
praiseworthy knowledge be the law, by what is its truth known? If it 
were known through the blameworthy and unreliable intellect, then 
the law itself is blameworthy. No attention, however, is paid to him 


227 


The Book of Knowledge 


who says that the law is known through certainty itself C&yn ol- 
yaqin) and the light ofbelief rather than through intellect, because we 
mean by intellect what he means by certain sight and the light of 
belief, naitiely the inner characteristics by which man is distinguished 
from die animal and through wh'ch he comprehends reality. Most of 
these wild errors have arisen from the ignorance of some who sought 
realities in words and erred wildly therein, because of the confusion 
which exists in the technical terminologies of men. 


228 


The Book of Knowledge 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

‘Asakir, ibn-, Ta'rikh, Damascus 1332 

Athir, ibn-al-, al-Kamil fi’l-Ta’rikh, ed. C.J. Tomberg, Leyden 
’ 1867-1871. 

Baghawi, al-, Masabih al-Sunnah, Cairo 1318 
Baghdadi, al- Khatib al-, Ta'rikh Baghdad, Cairo 1349 
Bukhari, al-, Sahih, Bulaq 1296 
Darimi, al-, Sunan, Damascus 1349 
Dhahabi, al-, tadhkirat al- Huffaz, Hyderabad 1333 
Fida, abu-al-, Mukhtasar Ta 'rikh al-Bashar, Constaritinpole 1286 
Ghazzali, al-, Kitab al-Mustazhiri fi Fadail al-Batiniyah, ed. and tr. 
I. Goldziher, Leyden 1916 

Hajji Khalifah, Kashf, al-Zunun ‘anAsami al-Kutub w-al Funun.e d. 

G. Flugel, Leipzig and London, 1835-1858 
Hanbal, Ahmad ibn-, Musnad, Cairo 1329-1333 
Hanbali, ibn-al-‘Imad al-, Shadharat al Dhahab fi Akhbar Man 
Dhahab, Cairo, 1350 

Hisham, ibn-. Si rat Rasul Allah, ed. F. Wustenfeld, Gottingen 1858- 
1860 

Hujwiri, al-, Kashf al-Mahjub ’tr . R.A. Nicholson, Leydon 1911 
Isfahani, al-, al-Aghani, Bulaq 1285 

Isfahani, al-, Hikyat al-Awliya ' wa- Tabaqat al Asfiya Cairo 1351 
Jazari, al-, Ghayat al-Nihayah fi Tabaqat al-Qurra ed. G. 

Bergstrasser, Cairo, 1933 
Jurjani, al-, Ta rifat, ed. G. Flugel, Leipzig 1845 
Khallikan, ibn-, Wafayat al-A ‘yan wa Anba ’ Abna ’ al-Zaman, 
Cairo 1299 

Majah. ibn-, Sunan al-Mustafa, Cairo 1349 


229 


The Book of Knowledge 


Makki, abu-Talib, al-Qut al-Qulub, Cairo 1351 
Muslim, Sahih, Delhi 1319 

Nawawi, al-, Tahdhib al-Asma’ ed. F. Wustenfeld, Gottingen 
1842-7 

Qazwini,al-, 'Aja ’ib al-MakhluqatwaGharaib al-Mawjudat, ed. F. 
Wustenfeld, Gottingen 1849 

Qurashi, ibn-abi-al-Wafa ’ al-, al^Jawahir, al-Mudiyah ft Tabaqat 
al- Hanafiyah, Hyderabad 1332 

Ras'ani, al-, Mukhtasar Kitab al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, ed. P K.Hitti, 
Cairo 1924 

Sam'ani, al-, Kitab-al-Ansab, ed. D.S. Margoliuth, Leyden 1912 

Shahrastani, a K al-Milal w-al Nihal, ed. William Cureton, London 
1846 

Sha‘ram, al-, al-Tabaqat al-kubra, Cairo 1345 

Smith, Margaret, An Early Mystic of Baghdad, London 1935 

Suyuti, al-, al-ltqan fi Ulum al-Qur'an, Cairo 1343 

Husn al-Muhadarah ft Akhbar Misr w-al-Qahirah, 
Cairo 1327 

Tabarani, al-, al-Mu 'jam al-Saghir, Delhi 1311 

Tabari, al-, Jami 'al Bayan ft Tafsir al-Qur 'an Cairo 1323-1330 

Ta rikh al-Rusul w-al Muluk, ed. M.J. de Goeje, Leyden 
1879 seq. 

Tirmidhi, al -Smart, Cairo 1290 
Tayalisi, al-Musnad, Hyderabad 1321 
ThaMabi, al-, Qisas al-Anbiya, Cairo 1297 

Usaybi‘ah, ibn-abi-, Uyun al-Anba’ ft Tabaqat al-Atibba ’, 
Cairo 1299 

Yaqut, Irshad al-Arib tla Ma'rifat al-Adib, ed. D.S. Margoliouth, 
London 1907-27 

Mu jam al-Buldan, ed. F. Wustenfeld, Leipzig 1866-1870 
Yusuf, abu-, Kitab al-Kharaj, Cairo 1346 
Zamakhshari, al-, al-Kashshaf Calcutta 1856 


